
                     The Library Assistant’s Manual




                          By THEODORE W. KOCH
                   Librarian, University of Michigan




                          Provisional Edition




                           LANSING, MICHIGAN
                  STATE BOARD OF LIBRARY COMMISSIONERS
                                  1913

------------------------------------------------------------------------




_Issued on the occasion of the 61st annual meeting of the Michigan
State Teachers’ Association, Ann Arbor, October 30-November 1, 1913._

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CONTENTS.

                                                                  Page
    I.     The library movement in the United States              7-15
    II.    Organization of a library                             16-19
    III.   Book selection and buying                             20-24
    IV.    Classification                                        25-32
    V.     Cataloging                                            33-38
    VI.    Reference work and circulation                        39-50
    VII.   The binding and care of library books                 51-53
    VIII.  Work with children                                    54-58
    IX.    The high school library                               59-66
    X.     Suggested readings in the Encyclopaedia Britannica    67-78

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER I.

              =THE LIBRARY MOVEMENT IN THE UNITED STATES.=


The forerunner of the American public library of today is found in the
subscription or stock company libraries of Philadelphia, Boston and
other cities. The oldest of these is the Philadelphia Library Company,
founded in 1731 by Benjamin Franklin who later referred to it as “the
mother of all subscription libraries in America.” The Rev. Jacob
Duché, a director of the Library Company, wrote in 1774: “Literary
accomplishments here meet with deserved applause. But such is the taste
for books that almost every man is a reader.” The Library Company’s
authority on book selection was James Logan (the friend of William
Penn) who was esteemed “to be a gentleman of universal learning and the
best judge of books in these parts.” In 1783 the Library Committee
instructed its London agent that “though not averse to mingling the
dulce with the utile, they did not care to have him buy any more
novels.”

In 1869 the Library Company was made the beneficiary under the will of
Dr. James Rush, who left $1,500,000 to establish the Ridgeway Branch.
On account of the conditions attached to the bequest, the gift was
accepted by a bare majority of the stockholders. Among other
restrictions, the will contained the following clause: “Let the library
not keep cushioned seats for time-wasting and lounging readers, nor
places for every-day novels, mind-tainting reviews, controversial
politics, scribblings of poetry and prose, biographies of unknown
names, nor for those teachers of disjointed thinking, the daily
newspapers.” The provisions of the will were strictly carried out and
today the Ridgeway Library stands as a storehouse of the literature of
the past, a monument to the donor and an evidence of the change that
has come over the world in its conception of the function of the
library.

=Boston Athenæum.=—Like the Philadelphia Library Company, the Boston
Athenæum was the outgrowth of a group of men who had in common an
interest in books. In May 1806, the Anthology Society, which had been
editing the “Monthly Anthology and Boston review,” established a
reading room, the object of which was to afford subscribers a meeting
place furnished with the principal American and European periodicals.
The annual subscription was placed at ten dollars, which was not more
than the cost of a single daily paper. The organization prospered and
by 1827 the treasurer’s books showed property valued at more than
$100,000. Two years later the library administration faced a new
problem: a woman applied for admission to the library. Having no
precedent to guide him, the librarian allowed the applicant free access
to the shelves. She was Hannah Adams, who wrote “A view of religious
opinions,” a “History of New England,” and “The history of the Jews.”
The next woman to ask for admission to the treasures of the Athenæum
was Mrs. Lydia Maria Child, (1802-1880), author of “The rebels,” “The
freedman’s books,” “Hobomok,” etc., but her ticket of admission was
shortly revoked “lest the privilege cause future embarrassment.” As
late as 1855 Charles Folsom entered a protest against women having
access to “the corrupter portions of polite literature.”

=Boston Public Library.=—In 1825 a plan was proposed whereby all the
libraries in Boston should be united under one roof. Later, a Frenchman
by name of Vattemare, caused to be introduced into Congress a measure
which was to build up great libraries through international exchanges.
A public meeting was held in Boston but a committee of the Boston
Athenæum opposed the scheme and it was dropped. However, in return for
some books forwarded through Vattemare to the Municipal Council of
Paris, the Mayor of Boston received in 1843 about fifty volumes, which
in reality formed the nucleus of the Boston Public Library.

In 1847 the Boston City Council appointed a joint committee on a
library. The next year a special act was passed by the Massachusetts
State Legislature authorizing the city of Boston to found and maintain
a library. Efforts were made to effect a union of interests with the
Boston Athenæum, but they failed. In 1849 the first books were
presented by the Hon. Robert C. Winthrop, and in the following year J.
P. Bigelow, then Mayor of the city, turned over to a library fund the
sum of $1,000 which had been presented to him as a personal testimony.
Edward Everett presented 1,000 United States documents, and Edward
Capen was appointed librarian by the Mayor. George Ticknor, a member of
the Board, helped to draw up a preliminary report outlining the ideals
for the new civic institution. The library was not to be a “mere resort
of professed scholars.”

The key note of the whole public library movement in America was struck
by Ticknor when in 1851 he wrote of his hopes for the new library
proposed for Boston: “I would establish a library which differs from
all free libraries yet attempted; I mean one in which any popular
books, tending to moral and intellectual improvement, shall be
furnished in such numbers of copies that many persons can be reading
the same book at the same time; in short, that not only the best books
of all sorts, but the pleasant literature of the day, shall be made
accessible to the whole people when they most care for it, that is,
when it is fresh and new.”

A timely friend was found in Joshua Bates, who gave more than $50,000
for the purchase of books, saying that he thought it was desirable to
render the public library at once as useful as possible by providing it
with a large collection of books in many departments of knowledge.

Thus the aim of the founders was quickly realized, it having been their
professed intention to make the library what no other library in the
world had either attempted or desired to become, “a powerful and direct
means for the intellectual and moral advancement of a whole people
without distinction of class or condition.” The Boston Public Library
was the pioneer of the large public libraries in America and as such
has long enjoyed a prominence which in a way has resulted in its
differentiation from other large municipal institutions.

=Astor Library.=—John Jacob Astor, who came to this country in 1783,
as a young man of 20, independent of capital, family connections or
influence, became the richest man of his day in the United States, and
wished to show his feelings of gratitude towards the city of New York,
in which he had lived so long and prospered. When he consulted with his
friends, Fitz Green Halleck and Washington Irving among others, as to
the object to which his liberality should be applied, the plan of
building a public library was the most approved and a decision was
promptly made in favor of it. Four hundred thousand dollars was left
for this purpose. The site chosen for the new Astor Library was in
Lafayette Place, in which street lived Mr. William B. Astor, a son of
the donor. Washington Irving was the first president of the Board of
Trustees, and Joseph G. Cogswell was the first librarian. According to
John Hill Burton in the “Book hunter,” Mr. Cogswell “spent some years
in Europe with Mr. Astor’s princely endowment in his pocket, and
showed himself a judicious, active and formidable sportsman in the
book-hunting world. Whenever from private collections or the breaking
up of public institutions, rarities got abroad in the open market, the
collectors of the old world found that they had a resolute competitor
to deal with, almost, it might be said, a desperate one, since he was,
in a manner, the representative of a nation using powerful efforts to
get a share of the library treasures of the old world. I know that in
the instance of the Astor Library the selections of the books have been
made with great judgment and that after the boundaries of the common
crowded markets were passed and individual rarities had to be stalked
in distant hunting grounds, innate literary value was still held as an
object more important than mere abstract rarity, and, as the more
worthy quality of the two, that on which the buying power available to
the emissary was brought to bear.” Cogswell was essentially a
bibliophile. He loved books “with an eager and grasping love,” said
Donald G. Mitchell. To his fruitful labor was due the splendid growth
of the Astor collections. Cogswell presented to the Library his own
collection of bibliographical literature, and gave the institution a
reputation for wealth in this field. “So well has the impress thus
imparted been maintained,” said Dr. Richard Garnett, “that the Astor
Library is said to contain hardly any light and frivolous books.” Both
the son and grandson of the founder, as well as other members of the
Astor family, added generously to the wealth of the institution so that
today the total endowment is estimated at over two million dollars.
With its increase in resources came an increase in its use. “I range
daily in the alcoves of the Astor, more charming than the gardens of
Boccaccio, and each hour a Decameron,” wrote Charles Sumner to Theodore
Parker. Among the constant users was Horace Greeley, who had a special
table reserved for himself.

=Lenox Library.=—James Lenox, a shy recluse, a bachelor, born to a
wealthy inheritance, found his chief joy in the collecting of books,
manuscripts, and objets d’art. He first collected early editions of the
Bible in all languages; then Americana, including the original editions
of the works of the great travelers and discoverers. John Bunyan and
Milton received much attention from Mr. Lenox, and he succeeded in
garnering a vast array of editions of those two authors. “This mode of
collecting has certainly its advantages,” said Henry Stevens, “but it
can hardly be denied that it is attended with serious disadvantages.
The result of all Mr. Lenox’s enormous study and labor, to say nothing
of his vast expenditures, it must be confessed, is a patchy library as
he left it. His favorite subjects and authors he rendered astonishingly
rich, but the subjects and authors he neglected at the same time are
also astonishingly numerous.” In 1870 Mr. Lenox presented the
collection to the city of New York, together with a block on Fifth
Avenue and a sufficient fund to erect a library building.

=Tilden Bequest.=—Samuel J. Tilden was not, according to his
biographer, John Bigelow, a book collector in the ordinary sense of the
term. “Mr. Tilden had a very fastidious taste for books, which he
indulged without much regard to expense. He bought books for his
immediate use and enjoyment, and apparently with no thought of
collecting a library that should be complete in any department.” For
the purpose of establishing and maintaining a free library and reading
room in the city of New York he established the “Tilden Trust,” to
which he bequeathed the sum of nearly four million dollars. By long
litigation it was reduced about one-half. The trustees were anxious to
apply this fund in a way that should prove most advantageous to the
people of New York City and at the same time strictly conform to the
wishes of the testator. The endowment was accordingly offered to the
Municipal Building Committee of the city in 1893, to be devoted to the
construction of a public library in a new City Hall, at that time
planned for Bryant Park. This plan had to be given up the next year
when the act authorizing the removal of the old City Hall was repealed,
but the expectations of the testator were carried out later by merging
the Tilden Trust with the Astor and Lenox bequests into one grand “New
York Public Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden Foundations.” This
consolidation was effected on May 23, 1895, when the Board of Trustees,
composed of seven members from each of the three foundations, proceeded
to plan the organization of a comprehensive library system. An appeal
to the municipal authorities was made in 1896 stating that if the city
would furnish a proper site and provide the money to locate thereon a
building suitable for the purposes of the New York Public Library, then
the library through the sale of its present sites, could obtain such an
addition to its funds as would justify it in providing for the
circulation of the books from this main building. The result was that
the library was granted the old reservoir ground on Fifth Avenue,
between 40th and 42nd Streets, and the trustees were enabled to begin
planning for the erection of the splendid fireproof structure,
eventually opened to the public in 1911.

=New York Public Library.=—The union of these three corporations to
form a single library worthy of the great American metropolis was very
justly characterized by Lawrence Hutton as “one of the most important
events in the whole history of the Island of Manhattan.” New York had
long labored under the disadvantage of having no public library from
which books could be freely borrowed by her citizens. Dr. Cogswell once
remarked that a free circulating library in New York was impossible and
that in five years any collection of books made for that purpose would
be scattered forever beyond hope of recovery. He here showed the
distrust of the book-collector and the attitude of the old style
librarian towards the books entrusted to his care.

The Astor and the Lenox Libraries were for reference use only, and were
never open in the evenings or on holidays. Through the great generosity
of Andrew Carnegie the New York Public Library is able to operate an
extensive series of branches, primarily intended for the purposes of
circulating books in the surrounding neighborhoods. “The main purpose
of the library is educational,” said the late Dr. J. S. Billings. “It
is also to furnish the means of recreation and amusement to large
numbers of readers. A great library like this must be omniverous. It
must have rare and costly books, indispensable to scholars, and also
the ephemeral pamphlets of the day which have no commercial value when
they appear but eventually become historical documents. The library
should be an encyclopedia always kept up to date.”

=The Spread of Public Libraries.=—From the above sketches some idea
can be gained as to how recent is the development of the library into
the tax-supported institution we know to-day. The last generation has
witnessed the spread of the public library movement westward at such a
rate that many of the most striking illustrations of the usefulness of
the modern library are to be gathered from the newer libraries of the
western states. Within the last two decades the public library has
gained strong allies in such new organizations as state library
commissions, inter-state library associations, and library training
schools. The library schools have inculcated into their students the
body of America’s library doctrine which has grown up with the movement
in this country. The association meetings have been helpful in
providing for the discussion of mooted topics and giving librarianship
a unity which it could not otherwise have gained.

=American Library Association.=—Organized in 1876 to promote the
welfare of libraries; it had the _Library Journal_ as its official
organ for many years, but now publishes its own Bulletin containing
announcements and proceedings of the annual meeting. The Association
aims to effect needed legislation and reforms which could not be
brought about by individual effort; to improve library administration
and lessen the labor and expense of it; to utilize the combined
experience of the profession, to promote esprit de corps among library
workers and to advance the common interests of trustees, librarians and
assistants. Various sections have been organized: the college and
reference section, catalog section, trustees’ section, library work
with children and state library commissions. It has a publishing board
of five members, appointed by the executive board, the aim of which is
to secure and prepare publications, catalogs, indexes and other
bibliographic and library aids. The publications are a great help to
libraries and references are made to a number of them throughout this
manual. The headquarters of the Association are located on the upper
floor of the Chicago Public Library. Address: 78 E. Washington St.

=State Library Commissions.=—Commissions have been established in
thirty-three states with the view of advancing the library interests of
the state. They aim not only to promote the efficiency of the libraries
already existing but also to help in the establishing of new ones. They
collect statistics of libraries throughout the state and so are able to
help the backward ones by showing what is being done in the more active
communities. Some commissions conduct summer library schools where the
untrained assistants from the smaller libraries can get valuable
instruction. Others have institutes and district meetings at which
topics of interest to the smaller libraries are discussed. Organizers
are sent to such libraries as are in need of reorganization,
recataloging or professional help along one line or another. In some
states the commission takes charge of the traveling libraries, which
are sent to clubs, granges and the smaller libraries. The sending of
books to the blind falls within the province of the library commissions
in certain states. Some are authorized to give direct financial aid to
the smaller struggling libraries. Nearly all the commissions publish
bulletins, circulars of information, library laws, selected lists of
helpful books, and occasional leaflets.

=Traveling Libraries.=—In order to carry the advantages of the public
library system to the residents of rural districts and villages, a
system of traveling libraries has been introduced into most of the
states. New York was the first to adopt this system, which it did in
1892 at the instance of Melvil Dewey, then State Librarian. The plan
was to send a number of small libraries, each containing one hundred
carefully selected volumes, which were lent for six months at a time to
“stations” from which requests had been received. In 1895 Michigan and
Iowa introduced the system as a part of the work of their state
libraries and in the following year a traveling library system for one
county was established through private generosity. The Wisconsin Free
Library Commission soon took it up and developed it for the whole
state. In some states where the traveling libraries have not been
fostered by state aid, the work has been carried on by the women’s
clubs, as for example in Colorado.

In Michigan application for traveling libraries can be made by study
clubs, Epworth leagues, Y. M. C. A. and Y. W. C. A., Sunday schools,
farmers’ clubs, granges, reading circles, etc. The titles are selected
from printed finding lists, and the books go by freight at the expense
of the borrower. If books on a special topic are desired, the request
should be filed by May 1st with the State Librarian in order to receive
them in the fall. The State Library has also a loan collection of
pictures, reproductions of the best examples of ancient and modern art.
The unframed pictures are loaned to art clubs, while the framed ones
are loaned to schools to be kept on their walls from three to six
months.




                              CHAPTER II.

                      =ORGANIZATION OF A LIBRARY.=


The organization of the average library consists of the following
component parts:

=1. Board of Trustees.=—The main function of the board of trustees is
to look after the financial interests of the library, to see that the
buildings and equipment are properly cared for, and to decide broad
questions of policy. Trustees should be (but are not always) elected
from the elite of the community. It is expected that in them will be
found a genuine culture, an appreciation of things pertaining to the
arts and sciences, combined with the advantages of education, travel
and sufficient leisure to look after public interests. “Cultivated
men,” says Edward Edwards, “familiar with books from childhood, have
usually a very inadequate perception of the toil and thought which have
to be given to the good arrangement, the accurate cataloging, and the
ready service of a library. What, then, is to be expected if a dominant
share in the management of a library be placed in the hands of men with
just enough of elementary education to bring into broad daylight the
intensest ignorance, in union with the most stolid self-conceit?” “A
little bookishness in a committeeman,” said Justin Winsor, “may be as
dangerous as a sip from the poet’s Pierian spring, particularly if
there is no deeper learning in any of his associates. He knows just
enough of books not to know that he knows nothing of libraries.”

=2. The Librarian.=—“A librarian,” said Henry Bradshaw, “is one who
earns his living by attending to the wants of those for whose use the
library under his charge exists, his prime duty being, in the widest
possible sense of the phrase, to save the time of those who seek
his services.” The librarian has been variously compared to the
commissariat in the republic of letters, whose business is not to fight
himself but to put others in fighting trim,—or to the host at the
banquet of knowledge who is assiduous in securing the comfort of the
guests and in placing before each one just the kind of food he likes
and requires. He knows that what is one man’s meat is another man’s
poison. Enthusiasm for the work is a prime requisite in the librarian.
Even a good staff cannot overcome the deadening influence of daily
contact with a chief lacking in enthusiasm.

To the librarian should be left the details of administration. The
librarian is the executive officer of the board of trustees and the
latter, if wise, will look to the librarian for getting the results
desired and will allow that officer as free a hand as possible. If the
librarian is not capable of administering the library, or worthy of the
fullest confidence, the sooner one is secured who measures up to this
standard the better.

=3. The Library Staff.=—The duties of the staff vary with the size of
the library. In the smallest libraries the librarian may be the only
one engaged in the actual work of the library, but in such cases the
library hours must be restricted to such as one person can take care
of. The next step in growth is to have some one relieve the librarian
at the desk and to do the more clerical work. Next come special
assistants to look after special tasks like cataloging and classifying,
desk work and so on. The staff, whether large or small, should consider
itself responsible to the librarian and should not, except in
extraordinary cases, go directly to the board of trustees with
petitions. The librarian should always be the spokesman for the staff.
Going over his head indicates a lack of sympathy and cooperation
between the librarian and staff that argues badly for the welfare of
the institution.

=Qualifications for Library Work.=—The best preparation for library
work is a thorough, systematic general education. To this should be
added a special preparation secured either through apprenticeship, a
training class, or a regular library school. Different positions call
for different qualities in assistants but library service in general
demands tact, perseverance, adaptability, habits of precision and
accuracy, with a fair amount of speed, ability to distinguish between
essentials and non-essentials, and a strong desire to be of service. A
certain familiarity with books and famous characters in history and in
fiction is expected of every one in a library. Personal neatness, good
temper, and a sense of humor are valuable assets in this as in other
lines of work. No one will succeed in library work who goes into it
merely for the money that can be got out of it.

Loyalty to the institution and its officers is essential to efficient
service. If the assistant cannot feel this sense of loyalty, the sooner
a new position is secured, the better for all concerned.

Dignity, self-possession, and self-reliance are valuable qualities in
any part of the library, but are especially needed by assistants at the
reference desk.

Qualities that unfit one for library work in general are physical
weakness, deformity, poor memory, a discontented disposition,
egotism, a lack of system in one’s method of work, and inability or
unwillingness to take responsibilities, a tendency to theorize,
criticise, or gossip, inability to mind one’s own business, fussiness,
and long-windedness.

One librarian advocates listing the virtues and personal qualities of
the staff and apprentices by having a questionnaire like the following
filled out for each assistant:

  Has she tact?
  Has she enthusiasm?
  Has she method and system?
  Is she punctual?
  Is she neat?
  Is she kind?
  Is she a good disciplinarian?
  Is she sympathetic?
  Is she quick?
  Is she willing to wear rubber heels?
  Is she a good worker?
  Is she accurate?
  Has she a pleasing personality?
  Has she a sense of responsibility?
  Is she patient?
  Is she courteous?
  Has she self control?
  Is she cheerful?
  Has she a knowledge of books?
  Are her vibrations pleasant?
  Has she executive ability?
  Can she speak French, German, Spanish, Italian, Yiddish?
  Has she social qualifications?
  Can she keep a petty cash account?
  What are her faults?

Mr. Herbert Putnam, Librarian of Congress, gives the following advice
to aspirants for library positions:

“First, secure the best possible general education, including, if
possible, a college course or its equivalent; second, acquire a reading
knowledge of at least French and German; third, add to this a training
in a library school; fourth, if a choice must be made between the
special training in a library school and a general course in a college,
choose the general course, but make every effort to supplement this by
the special course if only for a brief period; fifth, if an opportunity
occur for foreign travel, utilize it; sixth, if you have not been able
to contrive either a thorough general education or special training,
your best opportunities in library work will be in a small library
where your personal characteristics may be such as to offset these
other deficiencies; seventh, without at least a fair reading knowledge
of French and German you cannot progress beyond the most subordinate
positions in a large library.”




                              CHAPTER III.

                      =BOOK SELECTION AND BUYING.=


=Book Selection.=—Book selection makes the greatest demand on the
knowledge and administrative judgment of librarians and is the question
that produces the most friction between librarians and library
committees. If the trustees define the general policy of the library,
determine the amount to be expended on books, and approve purchases out
of the ordinary run, the librarian should be considered as the one
person best posted on the needs of the library, and as purchasing agent
for the institution should be allowed to buy where he can do so to the
best advantage. Of course, the problem is quite different in an
academic library from what it is in a public library. Especially in the
latter should the librarian be granted the utmost freedom in the
selection of the general run of books.

“We are often asked who selects the books for purchase and how this is
done,” says Dr. A. E. Bostwick in the annual report of the St. Louis
Public Library for 1911-12. “About 10,000 volumes are issued from
American presses yearly, not to mention those of England and other
European countries. Of these we can purchase only about 2,000 titles.
Of the remainder some are eliminated by their heavy cost, as in the
case of =editions de luxe= and most works intended for wealthy
collectors; some because of their class, such as technical works on law
and medicine, which we are leaving to the special local libraries
devoted to these subjects; and some because they are obviously below
standard, being either untrustworthy, trivial or objectionable. There
remains a very considerable number, any one of which we might purchase
but only a certain proportion of which we can buy with the funds at our
disposal. From these we try to select the best, judging from the
standpoint of a high-grade public library. Some of the considerations
that affect our decision are, first, public demand, to which we always
give heed unless it is obviously uninformed; secondly, a desire to
strengthen our collection in weak points; and thirdly, expert advice,
oral or printed, volunteered or specially asked. Here in St. Louis, we
are profiting by the services of numerous experts in special subjects,
which are freely given as a public service, and we scan carefully every
bit of expert testimony regarding the availability of books contained
in the bulletins of other libraries and in other current lists and
bibliographies. Trade lists and catalogues of all kinds are checked up
with our own to see what we lack, and the result is the assemblage of a
list of wants far larger than we can purchase. The final selection from
these is apt to leave behind some things that we ought to buy, but it
is unlikely to include anything that could well have been left out,
considering our special conditions and needs. The final word in
selection rests with a committee of the Board; but for ordinary current
purchases, and unless some point involving the larger policies of
selection is to be settled, this committee usually allows the librarian
to exercise his own judgment. Besides the sources of selection already
mentioned, books on approval are received in considerable quantities,
sometimes being sent voluntarily by dealers or individuals, sometimes
requested by the library.”

The librarian must develop a sense of proportion and beware of the
library patron with a hobby, and of the trustee who is interested in
building up only one side of the library, and of the scholar who thinks
that “only solid reading for the immortal mind should be placed before
old and young.” In buying for an average public library the aim should
be to choose general treatises rather than those covering only special
phases or special subjects. The special treatises would be the more
desirable for a university library, where they would be in demand both
by faculty and students, as authorities on detailed points, as aids or
as sources in further investigation.

Too much money should not be locked up in expensive volumes that will
be seldom used. The librarian should estimate the average cost of his
books per volume and, except in the case of reference books, should not
go too far beyond this average cost. He should avoid partisanship and
develop catholicity of taste and breadth of sympathy. He should try to
have something on his shelves for every patron in town, real or
potential, but should not allow the library to be drawn into any
sectarian propagandist movement. He should avoid controversial works,
sensationalism and the latest fad, and put off the purchase of the book
of the hour until he feels fairly sure that the demand for it will not
die within the hour.

The efficient librarian does not think too much of the sum total of
accessions, but is mindful of the fact that it is quality not quantity
that counts. “It doesn’t matter how many but how good books you have.”
This was said by Seneca, but the same truth has been stated by many
modern librarians. “I should as soon tell how many tons the books in
the Astor Library weigh as to tell how many volumes there are,” was a
sage remark of Dr. Joseph G. Cogswell. “Strength does not lie in mere
numbers; this fact is as true of books as of soldiers,” said Mr. W. E.
Foster. “One thousand carefully picked are worth two thousand assembled
at random.”

=Aids in Book Selection.=—The chief aid in book selection for the
average small public library is the A. L. A. catalog. The first edition
was issued in 1893 for the World’s Columbian Exposition. It was planned
as a guide for book buyers as well as for readers and as a manual for
librarians in the matter of book selection. To a certain extent it was
hoped that it would take the place of a printed catalog in some of the
smaller public libraries. By checking in the margin the titles of the
books owned it forms a convenient partial catalog of best books for any
library. In 1904 a classified and annotated edition, thoroughly revised
and brought down to date, was prepared for the St. Louis Exposition.
This included 7,520 volumes adapted to public libraries as contrasted
with 5,000 titles included in the earlier edition. A supplementary
class list of 3,000 titles, covering the books issued between 1904 and
1911, was issued by the A. L. A. in 1912. The “A. L. A. Booklist,” a
guide to the best new books, has just completed its ninth annual,
volume.

Various state library commissions have issued helpful lists.
Wisconsin’s “Suggestive list of books for a small library” is a good
specimen. The “Fiction catalog” published by H. W. Wilson Co.,
Minneapolis, is useful as a check list and contains many excellent
titles. In the same way the lists of the 100 and of the 1000 best
novels issued by the Free Library of Newark, N. J., are worth studying.
Various lists of best books, like Sir John Lubbock’s famous “hundred
best books,” or Dr. Eliot’s “five foot library,” are to be found in a
pamphlet “The World’s best books,” which is to be had free of charge
from the Globe Wernicke Co., Cincinnati.

For additional titles see “Aids in book selection” by Alice B. Kroeger
and Sarah W. Cattell (A. L. A. Publishing board, 1908.)

=Bookbuying.=—If it is desired to buy a special list of books, already
selected, it is usually best to place the order with one of the large
houses which make a specialty of library trade or with a local dealer,
if the proper service and discounts are assured. Cost of carriage may
total up high enough to offset a special discount, and so should be
considered in comparing prices offered by two different dealers. In
scanning a list of books to be bought, attention should be paid to

  1. Those titles which are to be had in reinforced bindings.

  2. Titles which are to be had in special editions, as in Everyman’s
  Library.

  3. Titles which are to be had from dealers in remainders and are
  likely to be offered at bargain prices.

The “List of editions selected for economy in book buying,” compiled by
Leroy Jeffers, and published by the American Library Association (25
cts.) is well worth studying.

The selection of books to be bought at any one time will be determined
by the prices at which they can be secured and consequently it is
desirable to constantly study dealers’ catalogs. Worn copies of popular
titles or copies that are loose in their bindings are not ordinarily
wise purchases, as they soon require rebinding, and thus make the total
cost exceed the first cost of a copy in reinforced binding.

Subscription books are rarely worth anything like the money asked for
them. If wanted they can frequently be bought from dealers in second
hand books, or from jobbers in remainders and surplus stock.

Books should not be bought from traveling agents. There are only a few
publishing houses who employ them who would not supply their books
through the regular channels of trade. “Editions de luxe” are now
generally understood to be for looks only, and “library editions” are
frequently so called because they are for the private and not for the
public library, being put up in a way not warranted to withstand wear
and tear.

=Accession Book.=—The accession book, which corresponds to the invoice
book of a business house, is the first of all records to be made of a
book after it has been acquired by a library. The accession book aims
to show the additions of each day in the exact order of their
reception, without classification of any kind. One turns to it to learn
what price was paid for a book, when and where it was bought, how much
was paid for binding it, if it was bound after being acquired by the
library, how much was paid for replacement if lost, etc. Each volume is
entered on a separate line, and secures a separate accession number. By
means of this number the history of any particular book can be traced.
The accession book is the most permanent of the library records;
entries cannot disappear as from a card shelf list, and it is of the
greatest value in case of books lost or destroyed by fire. Each book
should be entered immediately after it is collated and found to agree
with the order and bill. The entries must be kept up to date in order
to avoid loss and confusion. An accession number should be given each
separate volume. Giving a single accession number to a set leads to
endless confusion. A numbering machine will save time and help to
prevent errors.




                              CHAPTER IV.

                           =CLASSIFICATION.=


=Definition.=—Classification consists of putting like things together.
We do this every day, and the classification of books is only one
special phase of this general process. Thus, a man who owns a hardware
store does not place his goods helter skelter,—a stove, a box of
nails, some saws and then a furnace, but he runs over his stock and
classifies it, putting stoves in one place, nails in another. By this
classification he gains two things: first, he can find any one thing he
wants more quickly; secondly, he can tell how much of any one article
he has on hand and so decide whether he must lay in a new supply.
Likewise, the zoologist classifies all members of the animal kingdom,
so that he can learn what the different kinds of animals are and
study the relationship between them. Without the help afforded by
classification he would be overwhelmed by the immense number of facts
brought before him and without the aid of classification he would never
have known of evolution, the guiding star of modern investigation.

=First Principles.=—In our every-day life we lose much time hunting
for things for which we have no definite place. We have put them in the
place which was most convenient for us at the moment when we put them
away. Think for yourself how it is with your knowledge. From
observation, from conversation, from reading, you learn a little about
many subjects like electricity, botany, astronomy or politics, but in
this desultory way you do not learn very much about any one of these
subjects. Therefore you do not feel any special need of classifying
your information, but when you take up any of these subjects and pursue
it seriously you learn thousands of facts and relations, and then is
the time that you feel the need of some plan of arrangement of your
knowledge.

=Private vs. Institutional Libraries.=—One has the same experience in
regard to books. A person having a library of from fifty to three
hundred books does not feel the need of classifying them. The ordinary
arrangement is based upon size, color or convenience. The books in the
average house are so placed as to look their best. The classification,
as far as it exists, is an esthetic one. The owner knows the
exact appearance of every volume in his library and when he wants
Longfellow’s poems he can tell at a glance where it is. In a small
private library there is no occasion for all the history being in one
place or all the poems in another. As the library grows, the esthetic
principle of classification can be followed until the owner can no
longer readily remember how each book looks.

But our institutional libraries contain so many books that the
librarian cannot know them in the same way that he can the books in his
own private library and consequently he has to study the question of
classification and devise a method by which not only he, but his
assistants and also such readers as have access to the books, can
readily find them as wanted. Classification, the putting of like things
together, would, therefore, mean in a large library, putting histories
together in one place, the medical books together in another place, and
so with all other distinctive subjects. Each of these large classes
will, however, have to be subdivided. Thus, histories of Greece are put
together in one place, histories of Rome in another, histories of the
United States in still another. The subdivision in the larger libraries
is carried still farther and books on the period of the discovery of
America are put first, followed by books on the Colonial period of the
United States, the Revolutionary War, etc. United States history, if
well represented, is classified geographically. This process of
subdivision into separate groups of books on each state can be carried
still farther if necessary.

=Advantages of Classification.=—The following questions may arise:
What advantages come from the classification, and who are benefited?
The advantages come to those having access to the books. If one goes to
a library to get a volume by Arnold Bennett it makes no difference to
the individual whether the library is classified or not if he cannot go
to the shelves and pick out the book for himself. Likewise, if he wants
Young’s Astronomy he will probably get the book more quickly if he asks
the attendant to get it than if he tries to get it himself, supposing
he does have access to the shelves. But the time when the reader gets
the most help from the classification is when he wants to examine a
number of books on astronomy and can go to the shelves and find the
books on that subject all in one place. Then he can easily find what
different writers have to say about the habitability of Mars or he can
find what book appeals to him as being the most interesting and can
borrow it for home use. Any investigator finds access to the shelves of
a well classified library an immense help.

=An Aid to the Librarian.=—Another person who is greatly benefited by
classification is the librarian, and it is just as important that he be
helped as that the reader be helped. He is, however, helped in a
different way. He knows what the system of classification in use in the
library is and with the outlines of this scheme in mind he goes through
the library and finds out where it is strong and where it is weak and
can plan future purchases accordingly. If, for example, he finds on the
shelves little of value on photography he will make a note of it and
buy more books on that subject when funds are available. If he finds
that there is an undue supply of travel on hand, he will note that also
and buy fewer books in that class in the future. Without the help of
classification the librarian would overlook many such irregularities.
In an unclassified library they would be discovered only through a long
and tedious investigation. His only recourse would be the catalog and
that is not so well adapted to answer such questions.

=Basis of Classification.=—The next question is, what shall be the
basis of classification. It is obvious that this basis should be sought
in the character of the books themselves and should be applied with
constant reference to the reader and his needs. In regard to the first
point, character of the books, we know that books have been written on
all kinds of subjects,—religion, law, history, medicine, etc. and that
those subjects form the only rational basis for classification. A
classification based on these distinctions is the only one that helps
the reader. If a man comes to the library to investigate a particular
point in medicine, it is clear that it will help him if he finds all
the medical books together rather than all the books grouped according
to their date of purchase by the library.

=Present Tendency.=—Many schemes have been devised for the classification
of books, some very simple, others extremely elaborate. The present
tendency is to adopt the more elaborate classification. Formerly
most libraries were not classified at all, but the books were
arranged in the order in which they were received, the only grouping of
the books being in such cases one based on size,—folios in one place,
quartos in another, in order to save shelf room. Assuming that the
books in the library were numbered according to the date of their
accession from one up to, say, twenty thousand, it is clear that the
reader could find a book by a particular writer quickly enough by
looking up its number in the catalog, but if he had wished to consult
thirty books on one subject, it would be a very tedious operation and
most readers would not take the time for it.

=Simple forms of Classification.=—The most common plan in English
libraries is a modification of this scheme. The books are divided into
about ten classes and the books in each class are arranged in the order
in which they are received. The classes are distinguished by capital
letters. An example said to be very common in England, is as follows.

  A. Theology and philosophy.
  B. History and biography.
  C. Travel and topography.
  D. Law, politics, commerce.
  E. Arts and sciences.
  F. Fiction.
  G. Philology.
  H. Poetry and drama.
  J. Juvenile.
  K. Miscellaneous and magazines.

As an illustration of the way a book is marked in this scheme, B 2574
might be Green’s “History of the English people.” This book is marked
B. because it is a history. It is marked 2574 because there were
already 2573 books in this class at the time this book was added. This
mark, B 2574, is a very simple one and to that extent satisfactory. The
scheme is a great advance over the preceding one, because it brings the
books of a kind together. Since there are ten classes in this scheme,
it is evident that if a reader wishes to see all the books on one
subject he will have to examine only one-tenth of the library instead
of the whole of it, but even this is not felt to be minute enough. If
the library contains 200,000 volumes one class would contain, on the
average, 20,000 volumes, which is altogether too great a collection to
search through. If Green’s “History of the English people” were marked
B 2574, the next book might be Robinson’s “History of Peru,” marked B
2575, which is of course a very different subject. The case is still
worse in class E, which includes fine arts, useful arts and all the
sciences, so that a book on chemistry might stand between a book on
medicine and one on Raphael. This would not satisfy the reading public
of to-day,—nor the modern librarian. The classes F, fiction, and J,
juvenile, are not so bad; there is not so great a difference between
the books in these classes. They are used more by people seeking
recreation, rather than by those looking for definite titles. Jacob
Abbott wrote some two hundred juvenile books and many of these might be
scattered among the large class J. In class F, fiction, the English,
French, and German authors would all be thrown together. This would be
a disadvantage for any one desiring to read along a particular line.

=Open vs. Close Classification.=—The question of open vs. close
classification is an important one. By open classification we mean one
without minute subdivisions. An illustration of open classification is
the scheme of ten classes described above. As an extreme case of open
classification mention may be made of the theological library in which
only two classes were used, the one class containing the books that
were sound in their theology, the other the books that were unsound.

At the present time the tendency is towards close classification. It is
a necessity in large libraries and an advantage in small ones. In this
country the two great authorities on classification are Charles A.
Cutter and Melvil Dewey. Both have devised and published schemes of
classification which are generally recognized as having many excellent
features. In both schemes the classification admits of very minute
subdivisions. Dewey says that if the library has only one book on a
certain minute subject, that book ought to be put in its own special
class. It does not matter if there is no other book in the class. No
one can fully understand what is meant by close classification until he
has had considerable experience in classifying books. You can pick up
the printed scheme of classification and run your eye over the numbers,
but you will get comparatively little from them until you try to apply
them.

=Minute Bibliographical Classification.=—The following is a very
important distinction in regard to close classification which should be
carefully noted. It is one thing to classify books, but it is quite a
different thing to classify articles in magazines for the bibliography
of a subject. Magazine articles may be classified far more minutely
than books can be. Take, for example, the Bibliographia Geologica, in
which references are made to articles in geological magazines and
publications of geological societies. Here the articles are classified
according to Dewey. Dewey’s class 551 means physical geology. In this
bibliography there is a particular article marked 551.795,513,111,044.
That is to say the general subject of physical geology is subdivided in
one-trillionth parts and this article is assigned to one of those
parts. If one should apply for a library position and be told that he
should have to classify the books as closely as this, he would probably
never get the position. If he were given this article to classify, he
would just as likely as not put it ten billion points out of the way.
As a matter of fact, this bibliography is compiled by a number of
experts in geology. There are similar bibliographies of botany, zoology
and other natural sciences, all minutely classified and all compiled by
experts.

The reason that books cannot be as closely classified as magazine
articles is that they generally deal with broader topics. In the
average library it does not pay to classify books more minutely than is
warranted by the general run of books in the class in which these books
are to be assigned. In this regard, a distinction must be made between
libraries. The Library of Congress has devised a classification of its
own which is very minute, and a number of classifiers are employed to
look after the different fields in which they are more or less expert.
In this way, classification can be carried to the extreme limit of
closeness. Nothing keeps one more modest than classifying, for one is
continually brought face to face with things that one does not know,
and so many things of which one knows so little.

=The Dewey Decimal Classification.= The decimal classification is used
in this country and in Europe. It is suitable for both large and
small collections of books and for indexing. In many schemes of
classification letters are used to denote the classes, in others a
combination of letters and figures. Dewey uses only figures.

Dewey developed his system in 1873 and published it in 1876. Numbers of
three figures were used to denote the classes. Since then it has been
found desirable to subdivide much more minutely and this has been done
with increasing minuteness in the seven editions that have followed the
one of 1876. A general outline of Dewey is here given.

    000 General works
    100 Philosophy
    200 Religion
    300 Sociology
    400 Philology
    500 Science
    600 Useful arts
    700 Fine arts
    800 Literature
    900 History

Each of these is divided into ten sections, e. g.

    500 Science
    510 Mathematics
    520 Astronomy
    530 Physics
    540 Chemistry
    550 Geology
    560 Paleontology
    570 Biology
    580 Botany
    590 Zoology

Each of these is divided into ten sections, e. g.

    530 Physics
    531 Mechanics
    532 Hydraulics
    533 Pneumatics
    534 Sound
    535 Light
    536 Heat
    537 Electricity
    538 Magnetism
    539 Molecular physics.

These sections are still further subdivided until the requisite degree
of minuteness is reached. The system has various mnemonic features
which are helpful. Every figure has a meaning. An alphabetical list of
all these meanings is appended to the classification. Thus after the
word Hydraulics is 532, showing where to look in the classification for
this subject. All books on hydraulics receive the number 532 and are
together on the shelves. This fact illustrates one great advantage of
the Dewey system, that as the library grows the new books can be placed
with the corresponding old ones without re-marking the old ones, while
in the fixed location system the books are marked to certain
localities, and when moved by reason of growth of the library have to
be re-marked. This re-marking includes not only the books but also the
cards referring to the books. The re-marking is very costly and very
unsatisfactory. In Dewey’s system the books in any one class are
arranged according to some method. In most classes an alphabetical
arrangement by the names of the authors is simplest and best.
In scientific classes some librarians prefer the chronological
arrangement. In any case it should be clear and simple.

=Relative Location.=—“With a movable location all new books fall at
once into their proper places like the cards which are added to a card
catalog, and the new-comers push the other books along on the shelf,
just as new cards push the others along in the drawer. The consequence
is that a book which is here to-day may be on the next shelf in a month
or in the next alcove in a year; and the local memory, which is a great
help in finding books quickly is disturbed. The only remedy that I can
see for this is to substitute a subject memory for a local memory, to
get a habit of thinking of a book as belonging to a certain class
instead of as on a certain shelf (a much more rational memory, by the
way), and then to make it very easy to find the classes. This last is
not hard to accomplish. A class memory can be cultivated and may be
assisted by local memory which will find books by their position
relative to other books, instead of by their position relative to
alcoves and shelves, or doors and windows.”—C. A. Cutter.




                               CHAPTER V.

                             =CATALOGING.=


=Definition.=—The catalog is a directory of the library. A library
without a catalog is described by Thomas Carlyle as “a Polyphemus
without any eye in its head, and you must front the difficulties,
whatever they may be, of making proper catalogs.” A good catalog must
be an accurate and easily used index of the resources of the library,
answering the questions of the readers in the simplest and most direct
way possible. Such questions fall into the following groups:

  1. Has the library a certain book by a certain author?

  2. What books by a certain author has the library?

  3. Has the library a book with a certain title, the author’s name
  being unknown?

  4. What has the library on a given subject?

  5. What volumes of a certain series are in the library?

  6. Where on the shelves of the library is a certain book to be
  found, if it is not in use by a reader?

To answer these questions certain “entries”, or records, are made in
the catalog, called the author, title, subject and series entries.
Question 6, which is asked in connection with all the other questions,
is answered by the call number, which appears on every entry.

The most general book of reference is the dictionary. Every one is more
or less familiar with its arrangement. This fact is the chief argument
for a dictionary arrangement in a card catalog where authors, subjects,
titles and cross references are arranged in one alphabet, as in a
dictionary. Each “entry,” or record, is made on a card having on its
first line the word, or words, under which the entry is made. This card
is placed in its alphabetical place in the catalog tray.

=Author Entry.=—Every book must have an author entry to answer
questions 1 and 2. By author we mean the person, body, government,
society or institution responsible for a work. The entry is usually
made under the author’s surname, followed by his forenames.

=Catalog Rules.=—Every good code of cataloging rules gives detailed
directions for the author entry, telling how to decide who is the
author and what form of his name to use. In order to gain the
uniformity necessary for the easy consultation of the catalog, the
cataloger must decide upon her rules and then follow them carefully. If
this is done, the author card will ordinarily present few difficulties.
The American Library Association rules (1908) are very full and offer
the advantage of general conformity to the Library of Congress entries.
The question as to fullness of author’s name may well be left to the
individual library. The small library will need to use the author’s
dates only to distinguish different authors of the same name. Many
descriptive phrases may also be omitted, e. g. “pres. of the U. S.” in
the heading, “Washington, George, pres. of the U. S.” and similar
headings. This will in no way interfere with the use of the Library of
Congress cards, in spite of their fuller entries, as the full and less
full may easily be placed in one alphabet.

All works of fiction, dramas and poems, and works of non-fiction having
striking titles must have an additional record, or “added entry”, under
the title, in order that the catalog may answer question 3. For this
entry, the title is written at the top of the card. The average reader
more frequently remembers the titles of books than the names of their
authors. Consequently the cataloger must not be too sparing in making
title entries.

=Subject Entries.=—Non-fiction must also have added entry under the
subject or subjects of the book. It is here that the cataloger finds
scope for all her knowledge, judgment and common sense. Above all, let
it not be said of her that she

             “Affects all books of past and present ages,
             But reads no further than their title-pages.”

She must examine the books carefully, studying the table of contents,
preface, analyses of chapters when given, marginal notes, and the
chapters themselves when necessary. No entry is to be made under any
subject unless the cataloger is sure that the book contains material
helpful to one looking up that subject. She must always try to put
herself in the reader’s place, and get his point of view.

The cataloger is extremely liable to worship rules and to forget the
limitations of the average reader. There is danger of taking too much
for granted. In this respect the cataloger is like a certain professor
who was given to quoting Arabic in his popular lectures. When some one,
remonstrated, he said, “Oh, everybody knows a little Arabic.”

The cataloger must bear in mind the fact that many users of the library
do not know how to look up book titles. President Eliot once confessed
to a body of librarians that although he might claim to be as
intelligent as the ordinary frequenter of a library, he did not know
enough to use a card catalog.

=Cutter’s Rules.=—Having decided what the subject or subjects of the
book may be, for it may have one or many, the question arises as to the
form of the subject headings to be used. C. A. Cutter, in his “Rules
for a dictionary catalog” (4th edition, =1904=) has laid down the
principles of the choice of subject headings. One of the most useful
tools of the cataloger is the American Library Association “List of
subject headings” (3d edition, 1911), the result of widespread
consultation and discussion on principles and practice. Here is
gathered the experience of many libraries, of all types, and the
cataloger would do well to follow this list unless experience has shown
her that in some cases her special library requires a variation. The
suggested cross references are a great help, but must be used with care
and judgment. The cross references are the sign posts in the wilderness
of the catalog, and they must point the way clearly and with truth. The
cataloger never knows at just what point the reader will strike the
catalog, but if the subject headings and cross references have been
judiciously chosen he is pretty sure to reach the desired goal.

=Analyticals.=—In a small library it is most essential to show not
only what books the library has on a given subject, but also what
chapters or essays may be hidden in unsuspected volumes. Entries for
such parts of books are called analytical entries. The subject heading
is chosen in the same manner as for an entire work on the subject, the
author, title, date, call number and paging of the volume containing
the chapter being given below the subject heading. In similar manner
author and title analytical entries may be made for short stories which
appear in collections. Author analytical entries are frequently needed
for collections of essays, etc.

=Form of Card.=—The form of the card is of minor importance, provided
it is clear and gives all of the important information. It is well to
make prominent the author’s name by indention. The title must omit
nothing which will aid the reader in his choice of a book. The name or
number of edition and the name of the editor or translator should be
included. Names of illustrators may be omitted unless they are of
sufficient importance to require an added entry card. In a public
library added entries under the names of popular illustrators like C.
D. Gibson, Joseph Pennell or Walter Crane, will often prove helpful.

=Imprint and Collation.=—Fullness of imprint and collation varies in
different libraries. The cataloger should not count on the library
always remaining very small, but should include enough details of
imprint and collation to assure her that the cards will be useful when
the library has grown. The A. L. A. rules give detailed instruction
for imprint and collation, while any of the papers written on
cataloging for the small library will point out the possibilities of
simplification.

=Contents Notes.=—The contents of the book should be given whenever it
will add important items to the reader’s knowledge of the book.
Descriptive and critical notes will often tell a reader positively
whether or not he wishes the book, when the title alone could not do
this.

Subject headings for historical fiction—and also for poetry and
drama—will be found most helpful. Thus Winston Churchill’s “Crisis”
can well have an entry under U. S. History—Civil War—Fiction, and
Dumas’ The Whites and the Blues, an entry under Napoleon I—Fiction.

=Printed Cards.=—The use of the Library of Congress cards will be
found a great labor saver. If, at the time of ordering the cards, a
temporary slip bearing call number, author, title, place and date of
publication, accession number and suggested subjects and analyticals be
written, a second examination of the book on the receipt of the cards
will be unnecessary, unless the cards disagree with the book in some of
the data noted. The Library of Congress, on application, will send
instructions for the ordering of cards. Although it is cheaper to order
cards by serial numbers, it will not pay the cataloger to spend much
time searching for this number as for 1/2c per title the Library of
Congress will do this work. The use of the printed cards, though it
will destroy the uniformity of appearance of the catalog, will in no
way detract from its usefulness or usableness.

=Essentials.=—The cataloger must constantly bear in mind that the
catalog is a machine for the use of the public. Any time spent in
making it serve the readers more easily and quickly is time well spent.
Any time spent in beautifying it simply for the glorification of the
cataloger is time wasted. Rules,—careful, detailed rules,—are needed
so that the machine may do its work without friction and that every
part may fit into its proper place, but any rules that hamper the user
of the machine, should be promptly struck from the code. The cataloger
is paid to make a time-saving machine, and this is her duty,—to make a
machine that will bring together the book and the man who wants it with
the least expenditure of effort on the part of the latter.

“If the trustees can afford it,” very rightly says Miss Esther
Crawford, “there is one substitute for a catalog, viz., a librarian who
knows intimately every book in the library; who has the memory for each
book and that fine, discriminating knowledge of the reader’s tastes and
abilities which will enable her always to fit the right book to the
right person; who will never be absent from the library during the ten
hours in which it is kept open every day in the year; who will never
die nor take a vacation,—marriage is out of the question.”[1]

=The Cataloger’s Training.=—“The modern library movement is young, and
it is therefore not surprising that the subject of library work in
general and of cataloging in particular is not fully understood,”
writes Miss Theresa Hitchler in the eighth annual report of the
Brooklyn Public Library. “The average man does not know and cannot
realize the demands of the work, and has no idea, seemingly, that any
training or special aptitude is necessary. By way of contrast to this
average man’s view might be recorded the plaint of a prominent
librarian at a recent library club meeting that so great a per cent of
the talent of the library profession had to be diverted to the
cataloging department, to the detriment of the circulating desk. The
moral to be pointed out is that the catalog must be good as a first
requisite to a library. In the words of the old comparison, the catalog
is the key to the otherwise hidden material buried in books. In a
library of any size, the best desk attendant in the world is almost
helpless, or at best constantly handicapped, without a convenient and
rational classification of the volumes of the collection and the
bibliographical aid of a catalogue. The born bibliographer is as rare
as the born teacher or poet. The cataloging expert must have the quick
mind, sound common sense, broad view and good judgment of the
book-reviewer joined with the slow and solid qualities of the
bibliographer. The former qualities are needed for rapid classification
of books in all the various fields of human knowledge, from abstruse to
practical, from grave to gay, and for placing them under subject
headings in the catalog useful and specific, to student, scholar and
every day reader alike, and are by far the more important and
indispensable. The latter qualities are needed for recording accurately
the data of the books so classed, in a bibliographical catalog of a
form useful to people of all grades of intelligence. It stands to
reason that to cope with these requirements, a solid educational
training that gives an intelligent outlook on the various fields of
knowledge must be joined to a natural aptitude for bibliographical
detail, and added to these a technical training in such work. The head
of such a department must possess these requirements in an ever greater
degree, with an executive ability and knowledge of human nature above
the ordinary, since the results, good or bad, depend directly on her
ability and on her management, successful or unsuccessful, of the
varied material entrusted to her guidance.”

-----

Footnote 1:

  Cataloging; suggestions for the small public library, 1908.




                              CHAPTER VI.

                   =REFERENCE WORK AND CIRCULATION.=


=Reference Work.=—By “reference work” is meant work done in assisting
the public to use the resources of the library. Dewey defines it as
“systematic aid to readers.” A reference book according to Dr. E. C.
Richardson “is a book which is to be consulted for definite points of
information, rather than read through, and is arranged with explicit
reference to ease in finding specific facts.” In this class fall
dictionaries, encyclopaedias and hand-books of all kinds. The same
answer to almost any question may be found in a number of books in the
library by taking the time to examine them carefully, but the object of
the reference department is to serve the public as expeditiously and
satisfactorily as possible and reference books are the means to that
end. Any book referred to becomes for the time being a reference book;
but the term “reference book” as used in a library refers to the “ready
reference book,” i. e. the books that were specifically written for
reference use and to which the definition given above refers.

The reference collection is usually a small but exceedingly valuable
portion of the library and the reference work does not confine itself
to the use of the reference books, but to any book in the library which
may contain something which will help towards the desired answer. The
reference collection is generally placed in the reading room of the
library and in that part of the room most convenient to the public and
to the librarian.

The reference department is the heart of the library, and the more
alive and efficient the members of the department are, the stronger is
the beat of its pulse and the more far reaching the results of its
work. All other departments exist to make more efficient the work of
the reference department. The accessions department purchases books
that there may be live material to work with in the reference
department. The classifier groups the books so that all the material on
the various subjects in the library is placed most conveniently on the
shelves. The cataloging department catalogs the books so that the
reference department may by the simplest means find what is contained
in the library. Without the work of the other departments the reference
department would be tied hand and foot and might as well not exist.
With their cooperation it becomes the very life of the library,
reaching out in various ways into the community to make the influence
of the library more strongly felt.

=Importance of Reference Work.=—The average reader is uninformed as to
the use and helpfulness of any but the commonest reference books. The
duty of instructing the readers in the use of the ordinary library
tools devolves upon the assistants at the reference desk. They must
interpret the catalog to the public and incite in the readers a desire
to help themselves after they have been initiated into the use of a
dictionary card catalog and have had the use of some of the more
important reference books explained to them. If an education consists
not so much in getting knowledge as in knowing how and where to get it
when the need arises, then it is clear that the assistants at the
reference desk fill an important place in the library staff. They have
a great opportunity for helpfulness. Other divisions of the library may
labor successfully to build up the collections, and have them properly
classified and cataloged, but if the service at the reference desk is
inefficient the usefulness of the library is sadly impaired. The
reference assistants can make or mar the library’s reputation for
service.

Of course there is such a thing as doing too much for the patrons of a
library, thereby preventing their learning how to help themselves. Let
the readers understand that it is necessary to dig into the contents of
the books and discover things that the bibliographies and card catalogs
cannot point out.

Don’t say off hand, “I don’t know that we have anything on the
subject,” for fear that before long you will be saying categorically
that “The library has nothing on the subject.” You should aid the
inquirer by beginning the search. Say rather, “Let us see what the
library has on the subject.”

When the books are purchased and on the shelves, and the catalog is in
perfect shape for use, the library is still a riddle to the public.
There must be one or more capable persons to meet the public and put
the contents of the library at its disposal. “Knowledge is of two
kinds,” said Dr. Johnson. “We know our subject and we know where we can
find information upon it.” The latter is the knowledge necessary to the
reference librarian. Her knowledge of her library must be such that she
can find something about any question asked, if there is material on
the subject in the library. What great novel is there on the period of
the Norman conquest? Where can I find a map of the city of Seattle? Who
was the last man elected to the French Academy? What is the point of
resemblance between Maeterlinck’s writings and Coleridge’s Ancient
Mariner? Was Rabbi Ben Ezra a mathematician? Such are the questions for
which she must be ready, from morning till night, to help find the
answers.

The efficiency of the department is many times increased if it can have
on its staff those who in addition to their knowledge of the library
have had a broad education. The broader the better for there is no
subject on which she may not at some time be asked to find material.
The more versatile the members of the department are the greater is its
efficiency.

In no department of the library does personality count for as much as
in the reference department. The reference librarian may be a brilliant
student and have a thorough grasp of the various fields of knowledge,
but of what use will it be to her if she has not the ability to meet
people and to sink her own personality to a large extent? There is no
profession which throws one into the society of more varied types than
that of librarianship. The high and the low, the rich and the poor, the
educated and the ignorant, the cultured and unrefined all come to the
library for aid. The reference librarian must “be all things to all
people.” She must meet her public in such a way that if they come once
they will come again, feeling themselves cordially welcome. She must
have all the qualities which will make the library a place to which the
public will want to come, and herself the person they will seek for
assistance.

=How to Meet the Public.=—“The whole library should be permeated with
a cheerful and accommodating atmosphere. Treat boy and girl, man and
woman, ignorant and learned, gracious and rude, with uniform good
temper, without condescension, never pertly. Anticipate all inquiries
when possible, and especially put the shrinking and embarrassed visitor
at once at ease.

“Reference work in libraries large and small has for its first rule:
Meet the inquirer more than half way. To the stranger a library is
often an oppressive place, an awesome place—in his imagination. He
comes in shyly; everyone appears busy, his question suddenly seems to
him trivial; he won’t trouble these wise and busy people with it—and
goes out.

“A good second rule is: Learn at once just exactly what the inquirer
wishes to know. This is not always easy. Tact and a little patience
will generally effect it.

“A third good rule is: Whenever possible show the inquirer how the
answer is found, so that he may next time in some measure help himself.
It is surprising how many, especially of the younger people in a
community, can be taught within one year, on their occasional visits,
to make the proper use of at least a few reference books.

“Another rule of very good application is: Go first to a dictionary. In
many cases a question answers itself, or betrays where its answer may
best be found, if it is once plainly stated. And nothing is better than
reference to a few words in a dictionary for the clear statement of a
question. The larger dictionaries, and notably the Century, will answer
many more inquiries than even great readers often suppose.”—John
Cotton Dana, in his “Library primer” and elsewhere.

=Reference Books.=—In helping to answer an inquiry or to find material
on a subject, the first question in the mind of the reference assistant
should be, not where, or in what particular book, shall I find the
information, but rather: In what kind of a book, or in what class of
books? While it is necessary that the assistant should early become
acquainted with the most important or most convenient works of
reference on the various subjects of general interest it is especially
desirable to know the point of view of the inquirer, and what sort of
books, whether reference or research, will be needed.

Reference books—meaning ready reference books—may be generally
divided into two great classes: Dictionaries and Encyclopedias. The
first includes those works which treat of words used as language; their
meaning, history, pronunciation and use. The second class treats of
subjects, such as countries, men, animals, sciences, arts, trades and
substances; their character, history, distribution, etc. In both of
these classes the arrangement of the matter is generally alphabetical.
The term “dictionary” is frequently used for a cyclopedia of a special
subject, as in the case of dictionaries of biography, antiquities and
architecture. Books of facts, almanacs, yearbooks and census returns,
belong to this class.

Of the general, or universal encyclopedias, devoted to all classes of
subjects without regard to country, age, or character, every public or
school library, no matter how small, should have at least one, and the
larger libraries should possess several, as they differ considerably in
their treatment of the subjects. Encyclopedias published in the United
States, England, France and Germany, while treating of matters of
interest in all these countries, would naturally favor their own
nationality and include subjects in which their immediate readers would
be most interested.

A third class, to which the general name of bibliography is usually
given, includes not only the indexes to the literature of a subject but
catalogs of libraries, special collections, selected lists, etc.
Frequently these are the books to be consulted first, as they direct
the searcher to works and articles of far more importance than any of
the general ready reference books.

One of the most important and useful books with which the reference
assistant should become acquainted is Miss Kroeger’s “Guide to the
study and use of reference books,” (A. L. A. Publishing board, 1908;
Supplement, by Isadore G. Mudge, 1910). It is divided into classes by
formal subjects, but the annotations to the titles included are
generally sufficient to show the character of the works, and to what
kind of needs they would be best adapted. The Michigan State board of
Library Commissioners has published a handy “Annotated list of
reference books for school and public libraries,” 1910, which will be
found useful by those in charge of smaller libraries.

There are certain ready reference books which should be within reach of
every reading room assistant and with which all should be familiar.
Among these the following may be mentioned:

  Baker, E. A. A guide to the best fiction in English. New ed. N. Y.
  Macmillan. 1913. $5.50.

  Bliss, W. D. P. and Binder, R. M. New encyclopedia of social
  reform. New ed. N. Y. Funk. 1908. $7.50.

  American year book. N. Y. Appleton. 1910-date. $3.50. Annual.

  Statesman’s year book. N. Y. Macmillan. $3. Annual.

  Whitaker, Joseph. Almanack. Lond. Whitaker. 2s. 6d. Annual.

  World almanac. N. Y. The N. Y. World. 25c paper. Annual.

  Christy, Robert. Proverbs, maxims and phrases of all ages. N. Y.
  Putnam. 1905. 2 v. in 1. $2.50.

  Hopkins, A. A. Scientific American cyclopedia of formulas. N. Y.
  Munn. 1911. $5.00.

  Kent, William. Mechanical engineer’s pocket-book. Ed. 8. N. Y.
  Wiley. 1910. $5.

  Trautwine, J. C. Civil engineer’s pocket-book. Ed. 19. N. Y. Wiley.
  1911. $5.

  Standard handbook for electrical engineers. Ed. 3. Rev. and enl. N.
  Y. McGraw. 1910. $4.

  Bartlett, John. Familiar quotations. Ed. 9. Bost. Little. 1911. $3.

  Granger, Edith. Index to poetry and recitations. Chic. McClurg.
  1904. $5.

  Hoyt, J. K. Cyclopedia of practical quotations; English, Latin, and
  modern foreign languages. New ed. enl. N. Y. Funk. 1896. $6.

  Schauffler, R. H. Our American holidays. N. Y. Moffat. $1 a vol. A
  volume on each of the important holidays: Arbor Day, Christmas,
  Flag Day, Independence Day, Lincoln’s Birthday, Memorial Day,
  Thanksgiving and Washington’s Birthday.

  Walsh, W. S. International encyclopedia of prose and poetical
  quotations. Phil. Winston. 1908. $3.

  Brewer, E. C. Historic note-book: with an appendix on battles.
  Phil. Lippincott. 1891. $3.50.

  Haydn, Joseph. Dictionary of dates and universal information
  relating to all ages and nations. Ed. 24. N. Y. Putnam. 1906. $6.

  Larned, J. N. History for ready reference from the best historians
  and specialists. Rev. and enl. ed. Springfield (Mass.) Nichols.
  1901-1910. 7 v. $35.

  Ploetz, Karl. Epitome of ancient, mediaeval and modern history: tr.
  and enl. by W. H. Tillinghast, with additions covering recent
  events. Bost. Houghton. 1905. $3.

  Peck, H. T. Harper’s dictionary of classical literature and
  antiquities. N. Y. American Book Co. 1897. $6.

  A. L. A. portrait index; index to portraits contained in printed
  books and periodicals. Wash. Lib. of Cong. 1906. $3.

  Thomas, Joseph. Universal pronouncing dictionary of biography and
  mythology. Phil. Lippincott. 1901. 2 v. $15.

  Who’s who. N. Y. Macmillan. $2.50 n. Annual.

  Appleton’s cyclopedia of American biography. N. Y. Appleton.
  1888-1900. 7 v. $36.

  Who’s who in America; a biographical dictionary. Chic. Marquis. $4.
  Biennial.

  Moulton, C. W. Library of literary criticism of English and
  American authors. Buffalo. Moulton pub. co. 1901-05. 8 v. $5. a vol.

  Harper’s encyclopedia of U. S. History from 458 A. D. to 1902. N.
  Y. Harper. 1902. 10 v. $31.

=Poole’s Index and the Reader’s Guide.=—In 1848 William F. Poole, at
that time a junior at Yale, and librarian of one of the undergraduate
literary societies, began indexing by topics such magazines as were
available “for the purpose of helping students in the preparation of
their written exercises and society discussions.” Mr. Poole had noticed
that the sets of standard periodicals with which the library was well
supplied were not used, although they were replete with information on
subjects about which inquiries were made in vain every day. Mr. Poole’s
manuscript index soon showed serious signs of wear and in order to
preserve it recourse was had to printing. An edition of 500 copies,
printed in 1848 was soon exhausted, and in 1853 an edition of 1000 of a
much enlarged index was published. Mr. Poole’s increasing duties as
librarian of the Boston Athenaeum, and later of the public libraries of
Cincinnati and Chicago, left him no leisure for carrying on the index,
and so at the first meeting of the American Library Association in 1876
he proposed that the work be carried on by co-operation. This plan was
adopted and with Mr. Poole as editor-in-chief and Mr. W. I. Fletcher as
assistant and with the cooperation of some fifty libraries the work was
carried on until Mr. Poole’s death in 1894. The first volume of this
cooperative venture appeared in 1882, with supplements in 1888, 1893,
1897, 1903, and 1908, after which the publication was suspended.

In 1901 the H. W. Wilson Company of Minneapolis began the publication
of a monthly “Readers’ guide to Periodical literature,” with the view
to supplying the needs of the very small libraries. It was to be
cumulated quarterly and it increased rapidly in scope. In 1903 there
was incorporated with it the “Cumulative index to periodicals” which
had been published in Cleveland for several years. Two five-year
cumulations covering 1900-04 and 1905-09 have been published and have
grown rapidly in favor. This publication will henceforward continue the
work of the Poole Index.

=Public Documents.=—Among the sources of reliable information most
prized by the properly trained desk attendant must be reckoned the
various series of documents published by the United States Government.
While hitherto many depository libraries have been swamped with the
output of the Government Printing Office for which the libraries could
not provide proper shelf-room, the libraries are now, by a process of
selection and elimination, coming to learn what volumes are of most use
to their particular clientele. It is better for a small library to buy
these from the Government Printing Office than to have a whole lot of
documents for which they have no call dumped down on them. Among the
United States documents the following will be found the most useful for
the average public library:

  Congressional record.

    Bound volumes; contain daily proceedings of Congress. If the
    daily edition is procurable it ought to be filed with the daily
    newspapers. An index is issued every two weeks, and, with the
    bound volume, one for the entire session. Obtainable through the
    local Congressman.

  Census Bureau. Reports and bulletins.

    Cotton ginning reports. Contain comparative tables of the amount
    of cotton ginned from the crops grown.

    Forest products. This publication shows statistics on lumber and
    timber products.

    Tobacco reports.

    Special reports. Complete statistical reports on subjects of
    great importance. The abstract of the census is an exceedingly
    useful reference manual supplementing the annual statistical
    abstract.

  Statistical abstract of the United States.

    A comprehensive manual of general information issued annually.
    Advance edition in paper binding available through Congressman.

  Civil Service Commission. Reports.

    Administrative and statistical, with discussion of public
    questions coming within the scope of the Commission.

  Commissioner of Education. Reports and bulletins.

    Embody the results of the Commissioner’s investigations and
    labors, with statistics and special articles, and recommendations
    which will promote the purpose for which the office was
    established. While chiefly devoted to the educational system of
    the United States, there are papers on important educational
    movements in other countries. The bulletins include the annual
    bibliography of Education.

  Department of Agriculture.

    Yearbook. A most interesting and valuable compend of scientific
    knowledge, practically applied to agricultural life. It contains
    also much statistical information of use to farmers and others.
    It has been issued annually, beginning with 1894, and has become
    very widely known.

    Farmers’ bulletins and bulletins of the Weather Bureau, Forestry,
    Plant Industry, Chemistry, Entomology, etc. The Farmers’
    bulletins give brief popular articles in simple concise language
    on a great variety of topics. Over six and a half million copies
    of these bulletins are issued annually.

  Commissioner of Labor. Reports and bulletins.

    Give information as to labor and economic problems at home and
    abroad. To be had free of charge upon application.

  Library of Congress. Select list of references on various subjects.
  General publications.

  Smithsonian Institution.

    National Museum. Reports. Annual. Administrative report on the
    progress and condition of the Museum. The Congressional edition
    bears the same document number as the Smithsonian report, though
    the law calls for separate publication. The earlier volumes
    contained a number of articles on American archaeology, but the
    general appendix of scientific papers has not been printed since
    1904.

    Bureau of Ethnology. Reports and bulletins. Reports. Annual.
    Contain collections of illustrated papers, relating to the
    habits, customs, languages, folk-lore, religious ceremonials,
    etc., of the North American Indians. Bulletins. Papers relating
    to the North American Indians. Similar to the annual reports in
    character and contents.

  Geological Survey.

    Maps. Geologic atlas of United States. Issued in parts or folios
    as surveys are completed for various areas. Each folio comprises
    topographic, geologic, economic, and structural maps of the
    quadrangle, and occasionally other illustrations, with a general
    description.

    Bulletins. Cover a wide range of geologic investigation.

    Monographs. Comprehensive and exhaustive treatises on geologic
    subjects.

  Official gazette of the Patent Office.

  Official postal guide.

    Private publication, authorized by Post Office Department.
    Albany, N. Y., J. B. Lyon Co., $3.50 per year.

  Congressional directory.

    For the current session of Congress. Several editions embodying
    changes and corrections are issued during each session of
    Congress.

    General biographical directory of Congress, 1774-1911.

  Official register of the United States.

  The list of American and English genealogies in the Library of
  Congress, 1910; also, Heads of families, 1790, in the thirteen
  original states.

  Constitution of the United States, Jefferson’s Manual and Rules of
  procedure for the Senate and House of Representatives.

  Heitman’s Dictionary of the United States army, 1789-1903.

  Hamersly’s Register of the graduates of West Point, continued to
  1900.

=State Documents.=—In addition to the United States Documents referred
to above there are a number of State Documents which will prove
especially helpful as reference sources in a public library. They are
generally to be secured through the Secretary of State, and for
Michigan the following might be specified:

  Constitutional Convention, 1907-8, Journal and Debates (4 vols).
  The Journal contains comparative text of the Constitutions of 1908
  and 1850.

  Compiled Laws, and index, 1897 (4 vols.), and Index to the Compiled
  Laws and Acts to 1906.

  Legislature. Journals of the Senate and the House of
  Representatives and the Public and Local Acts at the biennial
  sessions after 1897.

  Michigan Manual. Official directory and legislative manual compiled
  by the Secretary of State. Biennial. Contains statistical
  information prepared especially for the members of the Legislature,
  with maps of legislative districts, lists of state officers, etc.
  Desirable in every library.

  Census of Michigan. 1904 and every ten years.

  State Pioneer and Historical Collections, annual volumes.

  Reports of the following:

    State Board of Agriculture Commissioner of Banking Department
    Board of Corrections and Charities Dairy and Food Commissioner
    Superintendent of Public Instruction State Board of Health
    Commissioner of Insurance Bureau of Labor and Industrial
    Statistics Commissioner of Railroads Agricultural Experiment
    Station, and Bulletins State Library—and State Library
    Commission.

=Loan Systems.=—The function of the loan department has been thus
defined: “To give to the reader the books he wants to take home and to
make sure that he will return them promptly for the sake of other
readers.” To this end a systematic record of books loaned is kept.

This record may be made to answer certain questions which arise in
different kinds of libraries. (1) What books are due on a certain day?
This is the “time record.” It is the record usually kept and is
necessary to insure the library against loss and to safeguard the
interests of the community. (2) What books are out, or, is a certain
book out? Who has it and when is it due? It is the “book record” and
this kind of a record is kept in most college libraries. (3) What books
does a certain person have out? This is called the “readers or
borrowers record.” Although some libraries keep all three of these
records, many keep only two and the majority only one.

It is not possible to say that there is one best charging system
although some form of the Newark or the Brown system is commonly used.
All systems require a register of the “borrowers,” kept either
numerically in a book or alphabetically on cards or both. Some
libraries require a sponsor or guarantor for each one drawing books,
but this is going out of favor and only an identification is demanded.
When the library is small or the patronage is large it is customary to
limit the number of volumes a person can have out at one time to two,
one volume of fiction and one non-fiction. These volumes can be kept
from seven to fourteen days with the privilege of renewing them for an
equal length of time. Other libraries give much more freedom in the
number of books one person may draw and in the length of time they may
be retained.

Most charging systems require that each book in the library be fitted
with a pocket into which is slipped a “book card” on which may appear
the author and title of the book, the class and book numbers and the
accession number. When the book is drawn out this card is removed from
the book and is kept in the library. On it may be entered the
borrower’s name or number and the date the book is drawn or to be
returned. A card may also be issued to each reader for purposes of
identification or to aid in charging the book. Such a card is a
“reader’s card” or “borrower’s card.”




                              CHAPTER VII.

                =THE BINDING AND CARE OF LIBRARY BOOKS.=


=Library Binding.=—The average library is spending about six percent
of its total income on binding. The newer and smaller libraries spend
less because their books have not yet come to need the binder’s
attention. The older and larger libraries spend more because of the
large number of books needing to be rebound and the numerous
periodicals taken.

The essentials of good library binding are durability, flexibility,
neatness, high grade of materials and suitability of style. Library
bookbinding is distinct from the ordinary machine made “case” or
publisher’s cloth binding and the decorative binding favored by
bibliophiles and amateurs. The weak points in modern book making are
poor paper, imperfect sewing, poor attachment of the book to the cover,
lack of flexibility in the back and joint, perishable leather and cloth
used in the binding. The results are that leaves become loosened, the
joints broken and the linings of the hollow backs come off and the
boards separate. The present tendency is to strengthen weak joints by
using double boards, inserting between them the linings and tapes on
which the book is sewn.

Much of the durability of a binding depends upon the quality of glue
used. The cost of glue used on a book cannot always be determined by
the price paid per pound, since the cheaper glue will not cover as much
surface as the higher grade glue which absorbs more water. The cheap
article is a great detriment to the life of the paper, the free opening
of the book and the flexibility of the back. “Flexible glue” as made in
this country is a misnomer. To say the least it is not all that the
manufacturers claim for it.

=Leather.=—The old saying that there is nothing like leather for wear
no longer holds true. Modern leather is much less durable than old
leather. Modern leather bindings decay mainly because of improper
methods of tanning, the use of dried and cured skins of inferior
quality; the use of acids and other injurious agents in the bleaching
and dyeing processes, the removal of the natural oils and the splitting
and artificial graining of the skins. Red and some shades of brown are
the colors found to be most durable. Many of the bright colored dyes
seem to hasten decay. Leathers that look alike may wear very
differently. Names applied to various grades mean less and less. The
experience of recent years with the leathers used in book binding has
led librarians to a wider use of book cloths of various kinds.

=Cloth.=—The cloths most in favor are (1) buckram, which if made in
the United States, is a strong cotton cloth, suitable for books of
average size subject to a fair amount of wear. The “library buckram,”
made by the Holliston Mills, Norwood, Mass., and the “legal buckram,”
made by the Joseph Bancroft Sons Co., of Wilmington, Del., are made
according to the specifications drawn up by the Bureau of Standards for
use on government documents. (2) Duck, or canvas, is the heaviest cloth
used in binding and is especially advised for newspapers and heavy
periodicals which are seldom used. (3) Imperial morocco cloth is
frequently used on fiction and juveniles. It does not take lettering as
easily as the buckram. (4) Keratol is a washable cloth which is used by
some binders on the sides of fiction and juveniles bound in half
leather. It should never be used for full binding.

=Preservation.=—Bindings should not be exposed to the direct rays of
the sun and the temperature of the building should not exceed
70 degrees Fahrenheit. Good ventilation is a great aid to book
preservation. Dampness affects injuriously both the binding and paper.
If leather bound books are handled much the oil from the hands keeps
the leather in fair condition. For leather books not often consulted,
the necessary oil should be supplied by application. Vaseline has been
used with success, but a more generally satisfactory preservative is
the following: Pure castor-oil with one half of its weight of paraffin
wax heated in an earthen jar until the wax melts. Apply with a flannel
cloth, paying special attention to the backs and joints. Use sparingly
but rub thoroughly. Then wipe with a clean flannel.

=Care of Books.=—In order to insure the proper handling of books by
the public, the staff must set a good example in this respect. Care
should be used in opening a new book so as to loosen but not break the
joints of the binding. Careless cutting of the leaves produces a ragged
appearance which is not conducive to increased respect for the volume,
after it gets out into circulation. Suitable paper cutters with smooth
dull edges should be provided and nothing else used. Don’t trust the
public to cut the leaves of new books or magazines. Many reputable
people are worse than careless in this matter.

Books should not be piled up very high, nor wedged into overcrowded
shelves. They must be kept dry. Dampness is destructive to both paper
and binding.

Do not turn books face downwards when open, nor allow others to
do so without politely calling their attention to this piece of
thoughtlessness. Books should be used for reading and for nothing else.
Open them gently and try not to let them fall. Do not try to carry too
many at one time.

Cleanliness is a great help to book preservation. A habit of constant
watchfulness for books needing repairs should be developed by every
member of the staff. “A stitch in time saves nine” in a library if
anywhere.




                             CHAPTER VIII.

                         =WORK WITH CHILDREN.=


The proper age for a child to become a patron of the library is the age
when he has the inclination to visit the library, possibly with older
brothers and sisters, to look at picture books, hear stories told, and
in case he is too young to be responsible for a borrower’s card,
occasionally to induce the older brothers and sisters to take home a
book for his use. A child’s first reading is by means of pictures and
his first introduction to literature through stories told or read
aloud, and even as early as the picture book period the library has the
responsibility of supplying the child’s need and desire for experience
through books and of developing his taste by putting before him the
best. The child who grows up with the library will be a more
intelligent and appreciative user of the adult department than he would
be had he grown up without the library.

The children should have a place of their own where they can find that
which is for them, be somewhat out of the way of adult patrons and feel
a sense of ownership, feel that some part of the library belongs to
them.

In the small library, if a separate children’s room is not a
possibility, let there be at least a corner fitted up as the children’s
domain. Let it be made attractive for them. If possible, have the
shelving lower than ordinary, or perhaps the regulation height with the
two upper shelves boarded up and covered with cork carpet, making a
frieze on which can be posted temporary sets of pictures. A frieze
space can be utilized in a number of ways. By all means have at least
one low table with chairs to correspond; the ideal way is to have two
heights of tables,—about 23 and 27 inches with chairs 13 and 15 inches
in height. Low racks for picture books and the magazines for children
are convenient and attractive. A space for picture bulletins or
illustrated reading lists is useful as a means of attracting attention
to fresh interest in reading, to material on popular subjects, or to
neglected classes of books. If framed pictures can be afforded, there
are good prints, lithographs and photographs which, if carefully
chosen, can be both decorative and educational from the standpoint of
art, as well as pleasing in themselves to the children. There should
be, if possible, at least one picture or reproduction of sculpture
representing a work of art of permanent value.

The books for the youngest children represent a distinct class of
reading and should be separated from the others in order that the
little children need not search through the whole collection to find
their own. It is best to shelve this collection near the picture books
on the one hand and the fairy tales on the other, thus allowing the
children to find the next step at hand.

=Rules.=—It should be remembered that rules and discipline are for the
moral benefit of the children even more than for the protection of the
library and it is wise to make rules only as they are found necessary,
but once made, let them be enforced. The key note of successful
discipline is sympathy with child nature. Through personal, persistent
work a desired atmosphere of order becomes to a great extent
established and obedience to unwritten laws a habit, although each
individual case requiring discipline may require individual treatment,
children being individuals. Problems of racial temperament and social
education, depending on the classes of society with which one is
dealing, enter largely into all phases of library work. One working
with children has many opportunities to become an influence for good in
their lives by way of little courtesies and obedience to laws of order
and fairness, which are taught as a matter of course.

Rules governing fines for overdue and damaged books must be decided
according to the policy of individual libraries. It is not good for
children to feel that a fine can be outlawed; better remit it for
sufficient reasons or try the plan of allowing them, in certain cases,
to work out the fine,—a plan which has been found satisfactory in some
libraries. A damaged book should never be passed without notice.

=Books for children.=—The great purpose of library work with children
is to attract the children to books: satisfying individual needs and
demands, and guiding their reading. Hence, the two most important
requisites for the children’s librarian are a knowledge of children and
of books, and if there is but one thing she can do by way of
preparation for this work, let it be that of becoming acquainted with a
few children’s books representative of various types. Nothing can take
the place of first hand knowledge of the books and of intelligence in
placing the right book in the hands of the right child at the right
time.

To be capable of guiding the reading of children it is necessary for
one, first, to have appreciation and discernment in adult literature,
second, to gain the child’s point of view. The various printed book
lists are helpful, but the librarian should depend upon her own
judgment as final critic in the selection of books for her children’s
collection. She must realize the qualities essential to particular
classes of books, such as history, and biography, science, travel,
fiction, and the qualities which make them suitable for children. In
the matter of books of science, etc., it is always best to obtain the
judgment of some authority in this line as to their accuracy. As to
their suitability for children in presentation,—simplicity of
treatment and interest of style,—the worker with children is still the
best judge. The story style of presenting science is, as a general
thing, of little use. Children can take their informative reading in a
straightforward way. Nothing is more disappointing to them than to take
a book for the sake of the story and find that it is only information
with a story covering, or to search for some definite information and
be constantly hindered by the narrative.

As to the real literature for children, or the story, perhaps there is
no surer way of gaining discrimination than by reading some of the
classics for children and some of the standard fiction; e. g., a few of
the old favorite folk tales, myths, and such adaptations for children
as Marvin’s Adventures of Odysseus and French’s Heroes of Iceland;
books of fiction such as Pyle’s Men of Iron, Kipling’s Captains
Courageous, Spyri’s Heidi. The children’s collection should be kept
well rounded and should contain a fair proportion of good poetry,
chosen from various standpoints: all that is childlike in subject and
form, much that is beyond the average child but appreciated by the
unusual one,—poetry chosen for beauty of sound or charm of movement.

=Work with Schools.=—The library must keep pace with the course
of study in the schools and develop its school reference work
with teachers and pupils by proving its helpfulness. The adult
collection will always be found an important help in reference work.
The duplication of certain titles to meet the school demand for
supplementary reading should be made only as far as is possible without
injustice to the children’s room collection as a whole.

The lending of sets of books for class room libraries is best begun
with schools at a distance too great for the children to walk to the
library to get their books. These collections are made up of about
fifty books, not text books nor required supplementary reading, but
books following the line of certain parts of the school work and books
of imaginative reading. A simple method is usually devised for
statistics of circulation, such as a large card for each book on which
is written the name of the child who is reading the book.

=Story Hours.=—The story hour is an ideal way of presenting the
classic literature. If there is plenty of time for story hours and for
proper preparation, a satisfactory division of children and of
literature is to invite the younger children to hear the folk tales and
other literature suited to their age, but not to have an age limit
excluding older children who would enjoy coming and perhaps have never
heard these stories; the children of ten years and over being invited
to hear Greek and Norse myths and cycles, such as the sagas, the
mediaeval legends, ballads, stories from Homer, etc., and miscellaneous
stories suited to their age. The stories which come to us from the folk
literature and other classic sources are to a great extent universal in
interest and appeal to all classes and nationalities of children.

One story hour per week is often as much as the small library has time
for and no story hour at all is preferable to the telling of stories
poorly prepared, or told by one without appreciation. Poetry hours and
clubs for reading, debating, travel study, etc., are important methods
of interesting, inspiring and guiding children. The love of poetry may
be kept alive by giving it orally and for pure joy in the story hour,
reading circles or occasional readings to small groups.

Visits to the homes of the children for one reason or another, and
visits to the school rooms to tell stories, to remind the children of
the library, or merely to show an interest in the work of the different
grades, will prove fruitful in many ways. Short printed lists of books
on different subjects are useful in suggesting new lines of reading to
children.

It is the privilege of the librarian to enrich the lives of her
youthful patrons. There are compensations for those in charge of small
libraries, where a trained children’s librarian cannot be afforded, in
opportunities for a greater share in the joy of working with the
receptive thought of the child, while the work with parents and
teachers as well gives deeper insight into the sympathy for the needs
of the children.




                              CHAPTER IX.

                       =THE HIGH SCHOOL LIBRARY.=


“There is no problem relating to the equipment of the high school which
is more pressing than that of the library,” said a recent editorial
writer in the =School Review=. At the annual meeting of the New York
State Library Association, in 1907, Dr. Downing, State Commissioner of
Education, suggested that some special study be given to the question
of high school libraries and a committee was later appointed to make an
investigation of library conditions in high schools and report at the
annual meeting in September, 1909. A questionnaire was sent to some
eighty-three schools, but only a few of the replies contained more than
the briefest answers. Twenty-five out of the fifty-two libraries heard
from were in charge of librarians who had some library experience or
training. Most of the librarians had been appointed to high school
positions since 1903. The first appointment of a high school librarian
in New York City was in 1900. The investigation as a whole was
unsatisfactory, inasmuch as the high schools reporting were not
representative of conditions throughout the State, much less throughout
the country generally, and because the replies left much unsaid as to
the actual use of and interest in these libraries.

In a discussion of “The difficulty of the high school library,”[2] Mr.
Edwin White Gaillard, supervisor of work with schools, New York Public
Library, claims that the problem is largely one of money and deprecates
the duplication of work already being done by the public library. This
is no more of an argument against high school libraries than are
similar objections against departmental libraries in a university. The
high school library is for a special kind of work—work that can best
be done in the school building, under the supervision and guidance of
one familiar with the special needs of the student. Mr. Gaillard grants
that much, of course, may be learned about libraries and library
methods in the high school library, but claims that the library habit,
the habit of going to the public library for all sorts of information,
of little or of great interest, cannot be acquired from the high school
library. This is a point which cannot be conceded. University
librarians are familiar with a similar argument against technical
departmental libraries to the effect that they have a tendency to make
the technical student feel that there is no need of his going to the
University Library, that the departmental library answers all his
needs. Experience, however, proves that to have these students use any
library you must plant it right in their midst. So with the high school
students: give them a good library in their own school building and
then see that they use it properly, for this is a part of modern
education.

In these days when high schools are extending their work in so many
directions and when books must be provided for supplementary work in
English, in history, in the preparation of debates, and in other
subjects, a well-equipped library is a necessity in the modern high
school. A motley array of old text-books, out-of-date encyclopædias and
miscellaneous volumes from the attics of well-meaning friends of the
institution will not make a good high school library. Upon how many
school libraries in this country can former pupils look back as did
Burne-Jones upon the little school library at Birmingham, as “that
blessed institution where we spent many blissful hours.” The failure of
many school libraries is due to a lack of proper care and fostering
attention after they have been established. The library is there out of
deference to a growing public sentiment in favor of such an annex, but
the library is too frequently left to run itself, or the responsibility
for its care is given to some teacher already overburdened with
class-room work. The responsibility ought never to be placed on the
teachers, or at least not on one who is doing full work as a teacher.
The average teacher, if given charge of a school library, will confine
her efforts to seeing that the rules are obeyed, that books are brought
in on time, and that silence and order are preserved. She will not have
time or energy to devote to the building up of the library, to instruct
the pupils in its use, to look after reference work with the students,
nor to help the teachers in finding needed material. “Disabuse
yourselves of the notion that it is teachers’ work, and a way out of
the difficulty will be found,” says a recent writer in the Library
Journal.[3]

The school library differs from the average public library in that it
is usually a reference library first and a lending library only so far
as the use of its books outside the building does not conflict with the
usefulness of its service to the teachers and pupils in the school
building.

=Duties of the Librarian.=—The first duty of the librarian is to make
the books, photographs, and other possessions of the library available
by a simple and acceptable system of classification and cataloguing.
After this has been accomplished it will be necessary to make these
possessions known to the teachers and pupils. This can only be done by
one who is familiar with the material and trained in its use. If the
reference work is done by an untrained worker it is a case of the blind
leading the blind. A teacher with no training in library methods will
not go to another teacher, known to be similarly deficient, for
information in regard to books, and the pupils will get comparatively
little real library help from one who is primarily a class-room
teacher, untrained to meet all classes of readers and answer a great
variety of questions.

The interested librarian will be on the lookout for any new books that
may be of use to teachers and pupils; she will try to keep a balance in
the matter of books for the various departments of study, to inform
herself on current events and, in short, make herself as useful in all
lines of high school work as is possible with the time and means at her
disposal.

=Assistance for the Librarian.=—As the work of the library grows it
will be necessary for the librarian to have assistance of some kind.
The arrangement for this will depend largely upon the circumstances in
the given school. In many schools student assistants are employed. In
some cases boys are hired at a small sum per hour to give their
services as pages. In others good students are allowed to volunteer for
library work, giving one hour a day to it. They enjoy the work and find
their enlarged knowledge of the library very useful. In some schools
the librarian is assisted by a member of the teaching staff, who thus
becomes familiar with the library and acquires some knowledge of
reference work and can assist the pupils in various ways.

=Purposes of a Library.=—The purposes of a school library should be
not only to provide laboratory material for the pupils’ work in
literature and history, to enable the teacher to instruct them in the
use of books as sources of information, and to assist the teacher in
other ways, but also to instil in the pupils an interest in books as
books, to cultivate a taste for reading. Too many high school graduates
have no conception of a book, other than fiction, as anything but a
task or a text.

The high school library should not try to compete with the public
library if there is one in the same town. Literature for recreation
pure and simple is better supplied by the public library, where it is
available for those who are both below and above the high school age.
But, on the other hand, if there is nothing to interest the students by
its innate appeal, if everything in the school library suggests
lessons, many of the students will view it with suspicion, and avoid
it, unless sent there by the teachers.

=Teaching the Use of the Library.=—Most pupils when they enter the
high school are ignorant of the use of the simplest and most common
reference books. They do not know the difference between a table of
contents and an index, and are so helpless in a library that their
teachers hesitate to give them work outside their text-books. Even
those who are best informed can be helped to the use of books which
will be of the greatest assistance to them in the preparation of their
daily lessons, essays, and debates.

Early in the school year the librarian ought to meet the new students
and explain to them in the reading-room the grouping of the books and
the fundamental principles underlying the making of a dictionary card
catalogue. The location of various classes of reference books should be
pointed out, the differences between a dictionary and an encyclopædia
explained, and the various types of both commented upon. The pupils
should be shown how to use “Poole’s Index” and the “Reader’s Guide to
Periodical Literature” and have the helpfulness of these aids clearly
brought home to them by concrete illustrations in connection with some
practical theme work or preparation for a debate. If this initial visit
to the library is made the subject of a required paper in the English
course the benefits are doubled. The pupils can be assigned problems of
various kinds involving the intelligent use of tables of contents and
indexes, and familiarizing themselves with a variety of reference
books.[4] They can be asked to fill out a call slip from the reference
in the card catalogue, take the volume to the delivery desk, have it
charged out, return it, see it discharged and put back in its regular
place on the shelves.

=Library Instruction.=—The library instruction, in order to be of real
benefit to the pupils, should be made a part of the school curriculum
and be given credit the same as other work. In most schools where it is
given it is counted as a part of the English work. In the high schools
of Michigan the time given to the library work varies from one to three
exercises for each of the grades. The instruction is given in the form
of lectures or informal talks, after which the pupils are required to
work out a set of problems on reference books. This work is done in the
library under the supervision of the librarian. The completed exercises
are in some schools handed in to the librarian and in others to the
English teacher, but the credit is usually given the pupil by his
English teacher. The talks are arranged to suit the work and needs of
the different classes. Those for the ninth grade pupils ordinarily
include instruction in the use of dictionaries, encyclopædias and
atlases, and the use of the table of contents and indexes in reference
books. The instruction for the tenth grade takes up the use of the card
catalogue, magazine indexes, year-books, and special indexes. The upper
classes may be given practice work in comparing the value of different
reference books, in learning to get references from various sources not
on the reference shelves, and in the use of some of the government
publications.

=Library Courses.=—One of the best library courses of this kind is
that conducted by the librarian of the Detroit Central High School,
where the work is graded to correspond with the regular grading of the
English courses in that school. The librarian has a graded series of
library questions which are among the best illustrations of this kind
of work for high school courses available in print. We give specimens
from the various series as follows:

    I. 1. Consult the indexes of poems by Holmes, and give the pages on
            which you find the following: (=a=) Poem beginning,
            “Listen, young heroes! Your country is calling.” (=b=) Poem
            entitled, “Dorothy Q.”

       2. Between what streets in our city does 870 Lafayette Street
            come?

   II. 1. Look up the “Seven Wonders of the World” in two different
            books. Do not copy them. Name the books in which you found
            them.

       2. In what work of literature does the “Old Man of the Sea”
            appear? In what reference book did you find it?

  III. 1. Find the allusion to “Field of the Cloth of Gold” in two
            different books. In what books did you find it?

       2. Use the card catalogue and give a reference for the life of
            John Greenleaf Whittier.

   IV. 1. (=a=) Who was governor of Iowa in 1906? (=b=) Where was he
            born?

       2. (=a=) Name two good recent encyclopædias, (=b=) Name two
            good older encyclopædias.

    V. 1. (=a=) What is the general index to Government publications?
            (=b=) How often is it published?

       2. (=a=) What is the Congressional directory? (=b=) Examine it
            and name any one reference point which interested you.
            (=c=) What is the Congressional record?

   VI. Name good reference books under the following heads: (=a=)
            Classical dictionary. (=b=) Gazetteer of the world.
            (=c=) Atlas of the world. (=d=) Year-book for current
            history.

There is an almost endless variety of questions which can be put to the
students to bring out points in connection with reference books. They
can be asked to name the various kinds of dictionaries in the library,
to tell which is the latest issue, to look up the same word in each,
and tell the differences noted in the treatment of the word in
question. See whether they can define a gazetteer, a glossary, and a
concordance. Ask them where they would go to find a picture of the
human skeleton, or colored plates of coats of arms and flags of various
nations. See whether the word copyright means anything to them.

=The Teacher and the Library.=—“The position of a modern librarian in
a high school,” says Principal McAndrew,[5] of the Washington Irving
High School, New York, “seems to me like that of a missionary in a
heathen country. No one but a librarian can realize what an astounding
amount of ignorance we high school teachers exhibit regarding the
purpose and operation of a library. Time and again in my library
experience I have observed teachers searching through reference books
who were too poorly trained to look in the table of contents and too
proud to ask for help.” A frank confession from the teacher is good for
the soul of both the teacher and the librarian. Certainly the classroom
teacher must inform herself more thoroughly on the rudiments of library
methods if she is to work in successful co-operation with the school
librarian. Normal schools are now giving instruction in library
economy. The Oregon Library Commission has published a broadside
listing under forty-three heads, “Some things a teacher should know
about books and libraries.” The list has been reprinted by the Michigan
State Library Commission with slight revision. As specimens the
following may be cited:

  1. What are the best cyclopedias?

  2. What dictionaries are best for school use and how do they differ?

  3. What books can you consult to find out whether certain
  subscription sets urged upon the district by agents have any value?

  4. What is the best printed aid to the formation of a teacher’s
  professional library?

  5. Where will you find annual summaries of the books on education,
  with notes as to their value?

  6. What U. S. public documents would be of value to you in your
  school work and how may they be obtained?

  7. What are the best printed lists of books for children and how much
  will they cost?

  8. What are the best graded lists of children’s books?

  9. Where can you get notes about children’s books that will be of
  service in guiding the reading of the children in your grade?

  10. What are the best books for reading aloud in your grade?

  11. What are the best collections of poetry for children?

  12. What books may be the best stepping-stones for the boy who is a
  slave to the “nickel library” habit?

  13. What simple, accurate, scientific books will you give to the boys
  who are, or may become, interested in natural science; and what will
  you choose for those who wish to identify specimens of insects, of
  minerals and rocks, of birds, and of flowers?

  14. If you do not know about these books how will you inform yourself?

  15. What are some of the best biographies for children?

  16. What are some of the good books of travel for use in geography
  work?

  17. How can you find what magazine articles have been written about
  any subject and how can you get these articles for the use of the
  debating society?

  18. What are the best books for the debating society?

  19. What are the best periodicals for children?

  20. What are the provisions of the school library law in regard to
  district-school libraries?

=Value of Library Instruction.=—Such library instruction as has been
described is of great help to teachers assigning work to pupils and of
the greatest benefit to the pupils themselves. Without it, the
librarian, teachers, and pupils are handicapped in their work and the
library fails of its full usefulness. A knowledge of how to use a
library will be of the greatest value to the student not only through
his high school course, but even more so in college, if he goes that
far, or in continuing his reading and self-culture through the means of
the public library when he discontinues his academic career. To be able
to use books effectively, to know where to find exact information when
wanted, is a kind of knowledge that comes from familiarity with
reference books and the use of books as sources. Such an acquaintance
with books is of infinitely more value in later life than knowing a few
text-books from cover to cover. The place in which to lay the
foundation for this proper and intimate acquaintance with books as
tools is in the school library and the period is that of the high
school age.

-----

Footnote 2:

  _School Review_, April. 1907, vol. XV, pp. 245-253.

Footnote 3:

  Vol. XXXIII, p. 136.

Footnote 4:

  For some problems of this sort, see “Modern American Library
  Economy,” by John Cotton Dana, Part V, “The School Department,
  Section 2.” “Course of Study for Normal School Pupils on the Use of a
  Library,” by Marjory L. Gilson.

Footnote 5:

  In an address before the library section of the National Education
  Association, Boston, July 5, 1910.




                               CHAPTER X.

          =SUGGESTED READINGS IN THE ENCYCLOPÆDIA BRITANNICA.=


The new Encyclopædia Britannica will prove a rich mine for the diligent
library assistant seeking information on topics connected with books
and libraries. While the index volume suggests some of the topics in
question, much of this suggestion is done by means of cross-references
and it is worth while to call special attention to and briefly
summarize the articles of interest to library workers. One of the first
things worthy of notice is the fact that the articles are written by
men who are recognized authorities in their various fields; such
scholars as Sir E. Maunde Thompson, late chief librarian of the British
Museum, Alfred W. Pollard and Cyril Davenport, also of the British
Museum, H. R. Tedder, librarian of the Athenæum Club, and editor of
“_The Library_” and J. Duff Brown, librarian of the Islington Public
Libraries and author of the “Guide to librarianship” and other valued
treatises on library economy.

=Manuscripts.=—Beginning with the =Manuscript= the student can read in
Sir E. Maunde Thompson’s article a description of the development of
the ancient manuscript, particularly among the Greeks and Romans,
leading on to the mediaeval manuscripts of Europe, and bringing their
history down to the invention of printing. The writer treats of the
materials used, the forms of the manuscript book (the roll, the waxen
tablet, the codex, the quires) the mechanical arrangement of writing,
punctuation, division of words, abbreviations and contractions, writing
implements and inks. Those who wish to pursue the subject further can
turn to the same writer’s article on =Palæography=, the science which
takes cognizance of writings of a literary, economic or legal nature,
done generally with a stile, reed or pen, on tablets, rolls or codices.
This paper traces the history of Greek and Latin palæography from the
earliest written documents in those languages which have survived,
touching especially on Greek papyri and vellum codices, the Roman
cursive and literary hands, and the various national hands derived from
the Roman hand. It is therefore concerned with the fundamentals of the
written records of Western Europe. Manuscripts with illustrations form
a class by themselves and are described by this same high authority
under =Illuminated Mss.= Here are outlined the chief features of the
Byzantine, Franco-Lombardic, Celtic (with special mention of the
Lindisfarne Gospels, of which a full-page colored facsimile is given)
Carolingian, Anglo-Saxon, Norman, German, Italian and Spanish. There
are separate paragraphs on the characteristics of the illumination of
the 13th, 14th and 15th centuries.

=Paper.=—In the first section of the articles on Paper Sir Maunde
Thompson discusses various theories as to the origin and early history
of this commodity. For an account of the writing material made from
=Papyrus= the author refers us to his treatment of that subject, where
he gives an account of the reed, its cultivation and wide-spread use,
its manipulation into the article of commerce and the use of the latter
by scribes. The second section of the article on Paper treats
especially of its manufacture and is written by J. W. Wyatt, with an
interesting supplementary note on =India Paper= by W. E. G. Fisher. The
name “India” was “originally given in England, about the middle of the
18th century to a soft absorbent paper of a pale buff shade, imported
from China, where it was made by hand, on a paper-making frame somewhat
similar to that used in Europe. The name probably originated in the
prevailing tendency, down to the end of the 18th century, to describe
as ‘Indian’ anything which came from the far East (_cf._ Indian ink).
This so-called India paper was used for printing the earliest and
finest impressions of engravings, hence known as ‘India proofs’”.

=The Book.=—As pointed out by Alfred W. Pollard in his article on the
Book, there is but a slight difference in general appearance between a
manuscript written in a formal book-hand and an early printed copy of
the same work printed in the same district as the manuscript had been
written. The type used by the early printers was as a rule based on
handwriting considered appropriate for use in a manuscript copy of the
same work. The development of the colophon into the title-page (a
subject on which Mr. Pollard is an authority) is briefly summarized.
Other characteristics of some of the early printed books, such as their
size, their paper, their illustrations and their bindings are noted.
The main features of the books of each century from the 16th to the
19th are succinctly characterized in separate paragraphs, and the
comparative cost of books at various periods is illustrated by
citations of prices of well known works.

=Incunabula.=—Another article by Mr. Pollard treats of Incunabula.
After summarizing the researches in this field the author grants that
it is literally true that the output of the 15th century presses is
better known to students than that of any other period. The subject has
been pursued with what some have thought to be excessive and misplaced
zeal. American librarians are naturally not so much interested in
incunabula as are their European brethren, but our larger libraries and
especially our universities are coming to have a fair representation of
the work of some of the early printers and one notable collection, that
made by Dr. Copinger, has come to this country, having been presented
to the Philadelphia Free Library by Mr. P. A. B. Widener.

=Printing.=—The article on Printing by C. T. Jacobi, the author of a
practical treatise on the subject which has gone through four editions,
is confined to the work of the printing press and is divided into two
parts: (1) history of the printing press and (2) modern presses. Those
who do not have a mechanical bent will probably not get much out of
these sections, but towards the end of the article is some general
information on printing which ought to prove of interest to every
library assistant.

The history of printing is treated at great length under the caption of
=Typography= by J. H. Hessels, author of “Gutenberg; an historical
investigation.” This article discusses in turn the manuscript
period, the earliest attempts at printing, block-printing, early
wood-engravings, block books, early printing with movable type, the
controversy concerning the invention (this with great fulness), of
early types and their fabrication, and ends with a sketch of some
printers who flourished after 1500. A second section, entitled =Modern
Practical Typography=, in part by John Southward, author of a
“Dictionary of typography,” deals with the material characteristics of
type, the sizes, and varieties of face, the manufacture of type,
composition and imposition, signatures and forms, typesetting machines,
electrotyping and stereotyping.

=Proof Reading=, by John H. Black, who was press reader on the new
volumes of the 10th edition of the Britannica, and John Randall, is of
concern to all of us who have to do with “the art preservative of all
the arts.” Proof reading seems to be practiced less and less in these
days of type-setting machines, but being informed on the subject will
help us in insisting on good work along this line.

=Illustrations.=—That the information concerning zinc cuts, half-tones,
three color processes, monotypes, electrotypes, photolithotypes, and
all other photo-mechanical methods of reproduction should be included
in an article under =Process= will probably strike American readers
as a Briticism,—but the facts are up to date and reliable. The writer,
Mr. Edwin Bale, art director for Cassell and Co., grants that the
term “process” is a somewhat unfortunate, one inasmuch as it is
descriptive of nothing in particular. The article discusses in
turn the various classes under the three generic heads: (1) =relief=,
such as zinc etching, half-tones, including those in color; (2)
=intaglio=, such as photogravures and monotypes, where, as in the old
copper plates, the printing surface is sunk below the surrounding
portions of the plate; (3) =planographic=, like lithographs,
collotypes, phototypes and heliotypes, which are all printed from flat
surfaces. The distinction between these various kinds of illustrations
is not easily grasped by the beginner, but no one whose constant
business is with books ought to be ignorant of the difference between a
woodcut and a half-tone, a mezzotint and a chrome-lithograph, a copper
plate and a cleverly devised imitation made from a zinc block, and yet
I have seen a good many library school graduates to whom the
whole matter was so much Greek. How can you buy illustrated books
intelligently if you don’t know whether the illustrations are what they
pretend to be? Better read up further in Mr. Frank Weitenkampf’s “How
to appreciate prints” and study carefully the Newark exhibit, “The
features of the printed book,” the first opportunity you get.
Meanwhile, make yourself familiar with the general information given by
Laurence Housman in his article on =Illustration=. Leaving aside the
illumination of manuscripts, the art of illustration in its modern
sense goes back to the invention of printing. Many incunabula were
enriched with drawings by artists of the French, German, Spanish and
Italian schools. Many engravings on both wood and copper by such men as
Dürer and Holbein were made to adorn the printed page. The art of
illustration has always been influenced by the prevailing pictorial
art. French engraving was influenced by the painting of Watteau.
English illustrations of different periods show the large following
which such men as Reynolds and Hogarth were accorded. Bewick laid the
foundations for a school of English wood engraving which persisted
until the invention of mechanical methods of reproduction came into
vogue. The cheap magazines created a great demand for illustrations
that could be inexpensively produced, and the files of illustrated
periodicals thereby became one of the best places in which to study the
work of wood engravers and illustrators whose work lent itself to
reproduction in cheap form. To those who know how to use them aright
this gives a new interest to some of the Poole sets which have of late
years been retired to out of the way places, such as _Once a week_,
_Good words_, _London Society_, _Sunday at home_, for in the pages of
these journals are found illustrations by some of the best men of the
school known as “of the ’sixties.”

The technical developments of the art of illustration form the subject
of a brief supplementary article by E. F. Strange of the South
Kensington Museum. This is concerned with the history of experiments
leading to the development of the present day half-tone block and color
printing.

=Bookbinding= is treated by Cyril Davenport, who sketches the history
of his subject from the earliest times when protective covers were used
over the smaller Assyrian tablets of about the 8th century B. C.,
through the days of Latin diptychs (the earliest prototypes of the
modern book) to the time of rolls of papyrus, vellum or paper. The
device of folding vellum into pages was first used about the 5th
century of the Christian era, and the sewing of these signatures by
fastening the threads around a strip of leather or vellum at right
angles to the line of backs was the next stage in the development of
the modern book. Then it was found that the bands needed protection and
so strips of leather were fastened down the backs, and in order to
prevent the tendency of the vellum leaves to curl, strong wooden boards
were put on each side and the leather back was drawn over the boards
far enough to make a hinge, thus giving us the half-bound books of the
middle ages. The next steps were to cover not only the back but also
the sides of the book with leather and then to decorate the leather.
The art of gold tooling spread quickly, and heraldic designs were used
for ornamentation from the days of Edward VI. The deterioration of the
quality of modern book paper and badly prepared leathers have been
serious drawbacks to good bookbinding, but there has been a revival of
interest in the art for its own sake during recent years. The
introduction of stamped cloth binding about 1822 developed into the
case binding of today, for which elaborate machinery has been perfected.

=Book-plates= are thought of by many librarians as being unworthy of
their serious attention, but a mere glance at the article by Egerton
Castle should convince the uninitiated as to the value of at least a
rudimentary knowledge of the subject. Mr. Castle’s study of “English
book-plates” appeared twenty years ago, but his interest in ex-libris
has apparently not flagged despite the demands of novel writing on his
time, which is a tribute to the fascinations of these little marks of
ownership. Among the illustrations are reproduced the earliest known
movable book-plate, one belonging to the monastery of Buxheim, dating
from about 1480, and the oldest English plate, that of Sir Nicholas
Bacon, 1574. Good examples are given of armorial plates of various
periods, of the Jacobean, the Chippendale or rococo, and the pictorial
where, as in the Bewick plate, the motif is a bit of landscape or, as
in the plate by E. D. French, a library interior.

=Bookselling.=—Even those librarians who think that they know
something about buying books, can with decided advantage read the
article on Bookselling. The modern system goes back almost to the
invention of printing. The earliest printers were also editors and
booksellers but as they were not able themselves to dispose of the
entire output of their presses they had agents at most of the
universities. The religious dissensions following the Reformation
created a great demand for books and there were troublous times for
both printers and booksellers. In the English copyright act of 1709 it
is ruled that if any person shall think the published price of a book
unreasonably high he may make complaint to the archbishop of Canterbury
and to certain other persons named who shall thereupon examine into his
complaint and if well founded reduce the price, and any bookseller
charging more than the price agreed upon shall be fined for every copy
sold. Unfortunately this law was never enforced. Were there such a
court of appeal today it would have a full docket! In the paragraph on
bookselling in this country it is pointed out that half the names in
the “so-called American catalogue of books” printed between 1820 and
1852 are British, the works of Scott, Byron, Moore, Southey and
Wordsworth having been printed here without the payment of any
royalties. Through the growth of intercourse with England and the
appearance on the literary horizon of native writers of ability, a
decided change was gradually produced in the American book trade and
the conditions here became more like those of Europe.

=Publishing.=—The subject of bookselling is treated still further in
the article on Publishing which is in a way a continuation of it. It
gives more historical detail concerning the early stages of this once
combined business, with a good deal on that topic of interest to
librarians and the book-buying public,—the net price question. The
early separation of publishing from bookselling is touched upon, and
the emergence of publishers as a separate class is outlined. The
transitory phenomenon of the man of letters assisting the publisher in
an advisory capacity as to the suitability of manuscripts submitted for
publication is an interesting chapter in the expansion of the
publishing business. Publishing being today largely a commercial
affair, the literary reader has in the main been supplanted by the man
of business with an aptitude for estimating how many copies of a given
book can be sold. One London publisher has of recent years paid no
salary to his reader but has given him a small commission upon every
copy that was sold of any book published on his recommendation. What is
wanted by the publisher is only too often not literary quality but
commercial value.

=Bibliography.=—The article on this subject by Mr. Pollard, is only
concerned with bibliography as the art of examination, collation and
description of books,—their enumeration and arrangement in lists for
purposes of information, and further, with the literature of this
subject, _i. e._ with the bibliography of bibliography. The examination
and collation of books to discover whether they are perfect and in
their original condition are especially important in the case of rare
books, like incunabula and first editions, piracies and spurious
imprints. Photographic forgeries of books can usually be detected by
the tendency of all photographic reproduction to thicken letters and
exaggerate every kind of defect. Some of these imitations are, however,
very cleverly made on paper of the period of the original and so are
very hard to distinguish from the latter.

=Book Collecting= is sympathetically discussed by Mr. Pollard. The
statement that the ultimate rarity of books varies in the inverse ratio
of the number of copies originally printed, though recognized as a
somewhat sweeping generalization, is conceded to be not far from the
truth. No one thinks of collecting what is easily procurable at the
moment. So long as the anticipation exists that a book will continue to
be easily procurable the collecting impulse is restrained. Book
collecting as a hobby is analyzed and the history of some notable
private collections given. As Thomas Watts once said, the main office
of private collections is to feed public institutions.

=Libraries.=—This brings us to the article on Libraries, written
jointly by H. R. Tedder and J. Duff Brown, an article of about 65,000
words and deserving of more than a passing notice. It is the latest
conspectus of library history and activity and if printed separately
might have made a book of several hundred pages which would have been
duly reviewed in all the professional journals. The fact that it is in
the Britannica insures it even wider publicity and in view of its
excellence we feel that it is worth while calling to the particular
attention of librarians.

The general treatment divides the subject into Ancient libraries (3
pages) Mediaeval period (3 pages) and Modern libraries (26 pages). The
first section has an archaeological rather than a professional
interest, but the mediaeval period is of importance to us because in it
is found the real origin of modern library organization. A rule of St.
Benedict required the monks to borrow a book apiece and read it
straight through. The books in the Benedictine monastery were kept in
_armaria_, or chests; whence the name of the Benedictine librarian,
_armarius_. The Carthusians are supposed to have been the first to lend
books for use outside the monastery. The library at Cesena in Northern
Italy is still preserved in its original condition. The Laurentian
library at Florence was designed after monastic models.

The development of modern libraries is first illustrated by examples
from the United Kingdom, by sketching the history of the British
Museum, and other English Government libraries, by outlining the growth
of the university libraries of Great Britain, incidentally touching on
the libraries of learned societies, clubs, municipalities, and winding
up with a section on British library administration. All this is
admirably done, and deserves careful reading. The authors suggest
several reforms and question some practices. For example, they feel
that it would be an advantage from an administrative standpoint if the
professional certificates of the Library Association were adopted by
the Civil Service Commissioners as a compulsory requirement in
addition to their own examination. They evidently favor some form
of “registration,” the mooted topic before the British Library
Association. The official recognition of a grade of properly trained
librarians would in the opinion of these writers tend to improve the
methods and efficiency of the government libraries, generally
conceded to be behind the municipal libraries in organization and
administration. It is pointed out that the reading of fiction in
British municipal libraries is much less than commonly believed, being
only 24 percent, even after due allowance is made for the reading of
fiction in current magazines. Attention is called to the gradual
disappearance of the unclassified municipal library, although in 1910
there were over 340 not closely classified, but only arranged in broad
numerical or alphabetical divisions. The replacement of printed
catalogs in book form by card catalogs and other forms, like the sheaf
catalog, easily kept up to date, is noted as growing in favor. The
great increase in the freedom of access allowed in lending libraries is
considered the most striking tendency of recent years.

In the section devoted to the United States, the Library of Congress
naturally comes first, and is characterized as “the most active
government library in existence.” The rise of the state and university
libraries is sketched, and something is said about the proprietary and
endowed libraries of the country. That these writers are not of the
group who have been saying unkind things about us, witness the
following: “In no country has the movement for the development of
municipal libraries made such progress as in the United States; these
institutions ... are distinguished for their work, enterprise and the
liberality with which they are supported.” There is an interesting
comparison of the cost of maintenance of English and American
libraries. East Orange, N. J. (population 35,000) spends $12,000 on its
library system, while Dumfries in Scotland (population 23,000) spends
$2,500. The city of Cincinnati, with practically the same population as
the borough of Islington, London, spends more than three times as much
money on its library system,—$130,000 as contrasted with $41,000. It
would be instructive to compare the work done in these particular
cities. The general statement is made that the provision of books is
more generous in the American libraries than in those of Great Britain,
but that more reading is done in the latter. The authors point out that
work with the schools and children generally is more cultivated in the
libraries of the United States than elsewhere. They are cautious in
their statements, but one can read the doubt in their minds as to the
wisdom of the “story hour” in the library. “The preponderance of women
librarians and their natural sentimental regard for children has tended
to make this work loom rather largely in some quarters, but with these
exceptions the activity on behalf of children is justified on many
grounds. But above all, it is manifest that a rapidly growing nation,
finding homes for thousands of foreigners and their children annually,
must use every means of rapidly educating their new citizens, and the
public library is one of the most efficient and ready ways of
accomplishing this great national object.”

While the remainder of the article, devoted to libraries in non-English
speaking countries, is of less immediate interest to the average
library assistant, it should be read with care for the perspective it
will help to give. We should know more of our historical background and
here is an excellent place to get a bird’s eye view of the whole
library movement. The account of the Bibliothèque Nationale and other
libraries of Paris, is very complete and contains references and
statistics not generally available. The description of the Berlin
libraries is less full, but satisfactory. The Italian libraries come in
for their share of attention, and the article ends with accounts of the
library movement and the noteworthy libraries in Latin America, Spain
and Portugal, the Netherlands, Russia, China and Japan. The article as
a whole will bear reading several times and can be consulted constantly
with full-reliance upon its detailed information.

In addition to the above there are articles which have a special
interest for different classes of library workers. The cataloger will
want to read what is said on the =Index=, where a high compliment is
paid “American enterprise” for the modern device of the card catalog
cabinet, and the Library of Congress for its printed card work. The
assistant in the periodical room ought to read the article on
=Periodicals= by Mr. Tedder, which deals chiefly with publications
devoted to general literature, literary and critical reviews, and
magazines for the supply of miscellaneous reading. It takes up in
historical sequence the British quarterlies, monthlies, weeklies,
modern magazines and cheap publications; then those of the United
States, Canada and other British possessions, France, Germany, Austria,
Switzerland, Italy, Belgium, Holland, Denmark, Norway, Sweden,
Portugal, Greece, Russia and other countries. Under the caption of
=Caricature= Mr. M. H. Spielman writes entertainingly concerning the
popular illustrated periodicals of Great Britain, France, Germany and
the United States. In the latter section he sketches the rise of Thomas
Nast, discusses the influence of _Life_, and the work of C. D. Gibson
and A. B. Frost. In his paragraph on =Cartoon= Mr. Spielman says that
John Leech’s drawing in No. 105 of _Punch_ was the first caricature to
be called a “cartoon.” After a while _Punch_ dropped the latter word
but the public took it up. The information concerning =Newspapers= has
been garnered by several hands. Mr. Hugh Chisholm, the editor of the
present edition of the Britannica, and for some years connected with
the London _Times_, writes the first installment entitled “General
considerations” giving the historical development of the newspaper
(particularly the English) from the Oxford Gazette of 1665, through the
days of the “leading article” by prominent writers, down to the time of
the “news agencies.” The present status of journalism, with its well
developed commercial side, is passed in review, and the influence of
American journalism is duly set forth. The cheapening of paper, which
within one generation dropped from 22 cents to as low as 1-1/2 cents a
pound, is shown to have had the obvious tendency of increasing the size
of newspapers and reducing the price. The attitude of some English
newspaper publishers towards news of the turf is instructive to
American librarians who have read of the “blocking out” of sporting
tips deemed necessary in some English libraries. The simultaneous
growth of the cheap newspaper throughout the civilized world is
commented upon by Lord Northcote in two interpolated paragraphs, which
are followed by some remarks on =Illustrated Papers= by Mr. Clement K.
Shorter. The remainder of the article by Mr. Chisholm consists of a
very full account of British newspapers (in which certain portions of
the article by Edward Edwards, of library fame, in the earlier edition
of the Britannica, have been incorporated) followed by an historical
sketch of those of the United States, of France, Germany and other
European countries.

Much of the information presented by Prof. E. G. Ravenstein under the
caption =Map= is of immediate interest to all of us. It treats in turn
of the classification and scale of maps, delineation of the ground,
selection of names and orthography, measurement on maps, relief maps,
map printing, history of cartography, and topographical surveys. The
reading of what Mr. H. R. Tedder has to say on =Pamphlets= may make the
library assistant who has to handle them more kindly disposed toward
this class of publications. There is nothing like knowing the history
of a subject to incite interest in it.

The bibliographies appended to each article will enable the inquiring
and ambitious assistant to pursue further such phases of the questions
involved as may make the stronger appeal; but the source of the
greatest satisfaction is that the workers in the smaller libraries,
where but little of the literature of librarianship is to be found, can
find within the covers of the Encyclopædia Britannica a conspectus of
authoritative statements on many matters of professional interest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 INDEX.


                                                    Page.
               Adams, Hannah,                           8
               American Library Association,           13
               Analyticals,                         35-36
               Assistants,                      17, 61-62
               Astor, John Jacob,                       9
               Astor, William B.,                      10
               Astor Library,                           9
               Author entry,                        33-34
               Bates, Joshua,                           9
               Bibliography,                        73-74
               Bigelow, John,                          11
               Billings, Dr. John Shaw,                12
               Binding,                         51-52, 71
               Book,                                68-89
               Book binding,                        71-72
               Book buying,                     20, 23-24
               Book collecting,                        74
               Book selection,                      20-23
               Book selling,                           72
               Booklist,                               22
               Book-plates,                            72
               Boston Athenæum,                         8
               Boston Public Library,                   8
               Bostwick, A. E.,                        20
               Bradshaw, Henry,                        16
               Burton, John Hill,                      10
               Cards, catalog,                      36-37
               Care of books,                       52-53
               Caricature,                             77
               Carnegie, Andrew,                       12
               Cataloging,                          33-38
               Child, Mrs. Lydia Maria,                 8
               Children, work with,                 54-58
               Circulation,                         49-50
               Classification,                      25-32
               Cloth,                                  52
               Cogswell, Joseph G.,            10, 12, 22
               Collecting,                             74
               Crawford, Esther,                       37
               Cutter, Charles A.,                 29, 35
               Dana, John Cotton,                   41-42
               Dewey, Melvil,                       29-32
               Documents,                           46-49
               Duché, Rev. Jacob,                       7
               Edwards, Edward,                        16
               Encyclopædia Britannica,             67-78
               Everett, Edward,                         9
               Foster, W. E.,                          22
               Gaillard, Edwin White,                  59
               Garnett, Richard,                       10
               High school library,                 59-66
               Hitchler, Theresa,                   37-38
               Illuminated manuscripts,                68
               Illustrated papers,                     78
               Illustrations,                       70-71
               Incunabula,                             69
               India paper,                            68
               Instruction,                            63
               Leather,                             51-52
               Lenox, James,                           11
               Lenox Library,                          11
               Librarian, duties of,            16-17, 61
               Libraries,                           74-77
               Library instruction,             63-65, 66
               Library Journal,                        13
               Library staff,                          17
               Library work,                        17-19
               Loan systems,                        49-50
               Logan, James,                            7
               McAndrew, William,                      65
               Manuscripts,                            67
               Maps,                                   78
               Michigan,                            14-15
               Mitchell, Donald G.,                    10
               New York Public Library,                12
               Newspapers,                          77-78
               Oregon library commission,              65
               Organization of a library,              16
               Palæography,                            67
               Pamphlets,                              78
               Paper,                                  68
               Papyrus,                                68
               Periodicals,                            77
               Philadelphia Library Company,            7
               Poole’s Index,                       45-46
               Printing,                               69
               Process,                                70
               Proof reading,                          70
               Public documents,                    46-49
               Public libraries, spread of,            13
               Publishing,                             73
               Putnam, Herbert,                        19
               Reader’s Guide,                      45-46
               Reference books,                     42-45
               Reference work,                      39-42
               Ridgeway Library,                        7
               Rules,                                  55
               Rush, Dr. James,                         7
               St. Louis Public Library,               20
               School libraries,                    59-66
               Schools, work with,                     56
               State documents,                        49
               State library commissions,              14
               Stevens, Henry,                         11
               Story hours,                            57
               Subject entries,                     34-35
               Sumner, Charles,                        11
               Teacher and the library,                65
               Ticknor, George,                         9
               Tilden, Samuel J.,                      11
               Traveling libraries,                    14
               Trustees,                               16
               Typography,                             69
               Use of the library,                  62-63
               Vattemare, Alexandre,                    8
               Winsor, Justin,                         16
               Winthrop, Robert C.,                     8

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES

This text has been preserved as in the original, including archaic and
inconsistent spelling, punctuation and grammar, except as noted below.

Obvious printer’s errors have been silently corrected.

Text in italics in the original work is shown herein as _text_.

Bold text in the original work is shown herein as =text=.

Footnotes have been renumbered and moved to the end of the relevant
chapter.

Pages are not numbered in the plain-text versions of this transcription
and may not be numbered in the ebook versions. Pages in the HTML
version are numbered. Links to pages are functional. Ereaders may not
render a complete book page on a single ereader page, therefore it may
be necessary to advance one or more ereader pages to locate items from
the index.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Library Assistant's Manual, by Theodore W. Koch

